<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">Seismic anisotropy of the Earth's inner core resulting from flow induced by Maxwell stresses</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Nature Publishing Group</publisher>
            <authority>Macmillian Magazines Ltd.</authority>
            <date>1999</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct>
               <analytic>
                  <author xml:id="author-0000">
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">Shun-ichiro</forename>
                        <surname>Karato</surname>
                        <forename full="init">S-i</forename>
                     </persName>
                     <email>karato@tc.umn.edu</email>
                     <affiliation>Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to the author (e-mail: karato@tc.umn.edu).</affiliation>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="institution">Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Minnesota</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <settlement>Minneapolis</settlement>
                           <region>Minnesota</region>
                           <postCode>55455</postCode>
                           <country key="US">UNITED STATES</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">Seismic anisotropy of the Earth's inner core resulting from flow induced by Maxwell stresses</title>
                  <idno type="articleId">47235</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0028-0836</idno>
                  <idno type="DOI">10.1038/47235</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">402</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">6764</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="871">871</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="873">873</biblScope>
                     <date>1999</date>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
      <profileDesc>
         <abstract>
            <p>Seismological observations indicate that the inner core of the Earth is elastically anisotropic<ref type="bibr" target="#b1"/>. Anisotropic structures are likely to be formed by dynamic processes and
                therefore such observations have the potential to provide constraints on flow in the inner core and on the geodynamo itself. But in addition to the difficulties in estimating the
                relevant physical properties of iron under inner-core conditions<ref type="bibr" target="#b2 b3 b4"/>, even the macroscopic processes responsible for generating seismic anisotropy in this region have
                yet to be determined<ref type="bibr" target="#b5 b6 b7 b8 b9"/>. As a result, the geodynamic significance of seismic anisotropy in the inner core has remained unknown. Here I propose—based on
                geodynamic and mineral physics considerations—that flow induced by the stress due to the magnetic field, the Maxwell stress, near the inner-core boundary produces an axisymmetric
                fabric responsible for the observed seismic anisotropy. The resultant seismic anisotropy reflects the geometry of the magnetic field near the inner-core boundary and therefore
                seismological observations might provide constraints on the geodynamo. This flow also causes non-uniform release of energy at the inner-core boundary, associated with solidification
                and melting which may affect the pattern of convection in the outer core.</p>
         </abstract>
      </profileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>The seismic anisotropy of the Earth's inner core<ref type="bibr" target="#b1"/> and the rotation of the inner core with respect to the mantle (“super-rotation”)<ref type="bibr" target="#b10 b11"/> suggest
            that this central portion of our planet is dynamically active. The super-rotation and the observed nearly axisymmetric seismic anisotropy suggest an important interaction between the inner
            and the outer core. Super-rotation is considered to be due to the interaction between the inner and the outer core through the Maxwell stress<ref type="bibr" target="#b12 b13"/>, but there has been no
            consensus as to the likely macroscopic processes that could cause seismic anisotropy. Here I will review some of the previous models of anisotropy in the inner core, and then show that the
            Maxwell stress could also play a critical role in the formation of the anisotropic fabric in the inner core that causes seismic anisotropy.</p>
         <p>As theoretical analysis indicates an effective draining of possible melt from the inner core<ref type="bibr" target="#b14"/>, the most likely cause of seismic anisotropy in the inner core is the lattice
            preferred orientation (LPO) of iron. In identifying likely macroscopic processes of anisotropic structure formation by LPO, it is important to appreciate that large-strain deformation
            and/or the long-term action of stress are needed for the development of significant LPO. A plausible macroscopic process must also explain the nearly axial symmetry of anisotropy.</p>
         <p>Some previous studies suggested that deformation-induced fabric (that is, LPO) of iron crystals due to thermal convection is the origin of seismic anisotropy<ref type="bibr" target="#b5 b15"/>, in much
            the same way as in the upper mantle. However, theoretical analysis of the energy budget and heat transfer strongly indicates that thermal convection is unlikely in the inner core, because
            of a low concentration of heat-generating elements and the efficient thermal conduction<ref type="bibr" target="#b16 b17"/>. Furthermore, the axial symmetry of anisotropy is not readily explained by this
            model.</p>
         <p>An alternative model is the texturing of iron crystals during solidification from the liquid outer core<ref type="bibr" target="#b6 b7"/>. Although this model can explain the axial symmetry of anisotropy,
            a major problem of this model is that such a texture is likely to be modified by large-strain plastic flow in the central portions of the inner core, if the inner core has a low
            viscosity as suggested by mineral physics<ref type="bibr" target="#b18"/> and geodynamic considerations<ref type="bibr" target="#b19"/>.</p>
         <p>Gravitational interaction of the inner core with the mantle may cause plastic strain which may be responsible for seismic anisotropy in the inner core<ref type="bibr" target="#b8"/>. However, this is
            unlikely to be a dominant mechanism for seismic anisotropy for two reasons. First, Buffett<ref type="bibr" target="#b19"/> showed that the stress due to this interaction must be relaxed quickly
            (∼1 yr), and that the average stress due to this interaction is ∼10<hi rend="superscript">3</hi> Pa or less (corresponding to a torque of
            ∼10<hi rend="superscript">19</hi> N m or less), so that the net effects of this force will not be large. Second, even if the magnitude of this stress was comparable to or larger than
            stresses due to other processes, the magnitude of the net strain is not large (∼10<hi rend="superscript">-4</hi>). Furthermore, the strain in each cycle of rotation of the inner core with respect
            to the mantle is not cumulative, so the total contribution of this force to the production of the LPO will not be very large.</p>
         <p>Yoshida <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi>
            <ref type="bibr" target="#b9"/> proposed that the stress due to anisotropic growth of the inner core causes fabric through stress-induced recrystallization. The stress due to this
            process is proportional to the viscosity as ∼η<hi rend="italic">u</hi>/<hi rend="italic">a</hi> (here η is the viscosity of the inner core, <hi rend="italic">u</hi> is the rate of inner-core growth; and <hi rend="italic">a</hi> is the
            radius of the inner core). Using the viscosity estimated from mineral physics and geodynamic considerations<ref type="bibr" target="#b18 b19"/> (<formula>10<hi rend="superscript">15</hi> &lt;
                η (Pa s) &lt; 10<hi rend="superscript">17</hi>
            </formula>), the stress associated with this process would be <formula>σ ≈ 10<hi rend="superscript">-2</hi>–1 Pa</formula>; under such a stress, the alignment of minerals to form anisotropic structure would take an exceedingly long time, greater than the
            age of the Earth.</p>
         <p>Another important source for stress that could last throughout most of the Earth's history is the Maxwell stress<ref type="bibr" target="#b20"/> caused by the magnetic field <hi rend="bold">B</hi>, <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">ij</hi>
               </hi> = [<hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">i</hi>
               </hi>
               <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">j</hi>
               </hi> - (1/2)δ<hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">ij</hi>
               </hi>|<hi rend="italic">B</hi>|<hi rend="superscript">2</hi>]/μ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi>
            </formula> (here μ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi> is the magnetic permeability of the vacuum,
                    δ<hi rend="subscript">
               <hi rend="italic">ij</hi>
            </hi> is Kronecker's delta), or equivalently the Lorentz force <formula>
               <hi rend="italic">f</hi> = (1/μ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi>)curl <hi rend="bold">B</hi> × <hi rend="bold">B</hi>
            </formula>. The importance of the magnetic field in the exertion of forces on the inner core has been recognized in relation to
            the super-rotation which may be caused by the balance of magnetic torque, <formula>Γ = (∫<hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">r</hi>
               </hi>
               <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi>
               <hi rend="italic">r</hi> sin θd<hi rend="italic">S</hi>)/µ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi>
            </formula>, with the torque due to viscous force<ref type="bibr" target="#b12 b13"/>, where <hi rend="italic">S</hi> is surface area and <hi rend="italic">r</hi> is the distance from the
            centre. In this case, the product of radial field (poloidal field, <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">
               <hi rend="italic">r</hi>
            </hi>) and zonal (toroidal) field (<hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi>) gives rise to a torque causing
            rotation. When <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi> is stronger than <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">
               <hi rend="italic">r</hi>
            </hi>, as suggested by some dynamo models<ref type="bibr" target="#b21 b22 b23 b24 b25"/>, the normal stress due to the
            zonal (toroidal) field <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">rr</hi>
               </hi> = -<hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
               <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi>/2µ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi>
            </formula> would be significantly larger than the stress causing super-rotation, and could play an
            important role in the deformation of the inner core. For a range of estimates<ref type="bibr" target="#b13"/> of <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi> (10<hi rend="superscript">-2</hi>–10<hi rend="superscript">-1</hi> T), the
            stress magnitude is estimated to be <formula>σ ≈ 10<hi rend="superscript">2</hi>–10<hi rend="superscript">4</hi> Pa</formula>. Notice that
            although this stress could fluctuate, the flow caused by this stress will assume a nearly constant pattern—at least over an average period of constant magnetic polarity
                (0.1–10 Myr)<ref type="bibr" target="#b23"/>, which is much longer than the timescale of fluctuation of gravitational force due to inner-core/mantle interaction
                (∼10<hi rend="superscript">2</hi>–10<hi rend="superscript">3</hi> yr) (refs <ref type="bibr" target="#b17"/>, <ref type="bibr" target="#b18"/>). As a result, the magnitude of strain associated
            with this process will be significantly larger than that due to deformation by gravitational interaction.</p>
         <p>To investigate the nature of flow due to this stress, I consider a case where the zonal (toroidal) field dominates at the boundary of the inner and outer core. In this case, the Lorentz
            force squeezes inner-core materials towards the rotation axis of the inner core, and moves materials from the regions of high stress to the regions of low stress (<ref type="figure" target="#f1">Fig.
                1</ref>). The materials that reach the low-stress regions will melt, and the materials that have been removed from the high-stress regions will be replaced by the solidification of
            molten iron in the nearby regions. The heat released or absorbed by these processes is likely to be carried away quickly through the outer core relative to the rate of flow in the inner
            core, because the outer-core materials have a much lower viscosity than the inner-core materials. In this case, the shape of the inner core is defined by the melting temperature of iron,
            and will remain unchanged despite large flow.</p>
         <p>I have calculated the flow field by solving the Stokes equation with appropriate boundary conditions. The boundary conditions for this problem are (1) no singularities at the centre of
            the inner core, (2) no shear traction at the inner–outer core boundary (<formula>
               <hi rend="italic">r</hi> = <hi rend="italic">a</hi>
            </formula>, where <hi rend="italic">a</hi> is the radius of the inner core) and
            (3) the continuation of normal traction (σ<hi rend="subscript">
               <hi rend="italic">rr</hi>
            </hi>) at the inner–outer core boundary. I assume that the normal stress at the inner–outer core boundary is
            determined by the Maxwell stress, σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ), thus, <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">
                  <hi rend="italic">rr</hi>
               </hi>(<hi rend="italic">a</hi>, θ,
                φ) = -<hi rend="italic">B</hi>
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>/2μ<hi rend="subscript">0</hi> ≡ -σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ)</formula> where the zonal (toroidal) field <hi rend="italic">B</hi>
            <hi rend="subscript">φ</hi> is written as <hi rend="italic">B</hi> for simplicity, θ is co-latitude and φ is
            longitude.</p>
         <p>To illustrate the basic physics, I consider simple cases where the Maxwell stress has the following form, <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ) =
                    <hi rend="italic">A</hi>(1 - cos 2θ)</formula> or <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ) = <hi rend="italic">A</hi>(1 - cos 4θ)</formula>, corresponding
            to the symmetric (<formula>
               <hi rend="italic">B</hi> ∝ sin θ</formula>) or antisymmetric (<formula>
               <hi rend="italic">B</hi> ∝ sin 2θ</formula>) toroidal field, respectively. The flow patterns
            corresponding to these patterns of Maxwell stress are shown in <ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2</ref>. The symmetric field causes a flow pattern dominated by the degree 2 pattern: flow from
            equatorial regions to the polar regions. The antisymmetric field causes a flow pattern that contains both degree 2 and 4 components, but because the field is strong near the polar regions,
            the flow pattern is dominated by the flow from the polar regions to the equatorial regions. The stress magnitude is <formula>∼<hi rend="italic">A</hi> ≈ 10<hi rend="superscript">3</hi> Pa</formula>. The velocity of this flow is of the order of <formula>∼<hi rend="italic">aA</hi>/10η ≈ 10<hi rend="superscript">-9</hi> - 10<hi rend="superscript">-7</hi> m s<hi rend="superscript">-1</hi>
            </formula>. Thus the timescale of the flow is
                    <formula>∼10η/<hi rend="italic">A</hi> ≈ 1–100 Myr</formula>. This timescale is comparable to (or somewhat greater than) the timescale of magnetic field polarity. When a
            reversal occurs, there will be a short period (10<hi rend="superscript">3</hi>–10<hi rend="superscript">4</hi> yr; ref. <ref type="bibr" target="#b23"/>) in which the magnetic field assumes very
            different geometry, but the geometry of the Maxwell stress will be similar to that for the reversed magnetic polarity. Therefore the flow pattern will not be significantly affected by a
            field reversal.</p>
         <p>This Maxwell-stress-induced flow has two important consequences. First, the flow results in a large strain and hence could cause significant fabric (LPO) of inner-core materials. The
            geometry of anisotropy is closely related to the geometry of the magnetic field near the inner–outer core boundary. The LPO due to this process has axial symmetry, regardless of the
            actual mechanisms causing it. The seismic anisotropy caused by the flow depends on the microscopic mechanism of LPO and the elastic constants of iron. For the flow pattern caused by the
            antisymmetric toroidal field which corresponds to the αω-dynamo<ref type="bibr" target="#b24"/> or the α<hi rend="superscript">2</hi>ω-dynamo<ref type="bibr" target="#b25"/>, for example, the elastic
            constants determined by Singh <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi>
            <ref type="bibr" target="#b3"/> and the dominant prismatic slip along the <hi rend="italic">c</hi>-axis are consistent with the seismological observation of the fast P-wave
            velocity along the rotation axis. However, neither the elastic constants nor the dominant slip systems in inner-core materials are well constrained at present.</p>
         <p>Second, the flow causes non-uniform energy release at the inner–outer core boundary due to the melting or solidification of iron. Because the flow velocity in this model
                (∼10<hi rend="superscript">-9</hi>–10<hi rend="superscript">-7</hi> m s<hi rend="superscript">-1</hi>) is comparable to (or faster than) the likely growth velocity of the inner core
                (∼10<hi rend="superscript">-10</hi> m s<hi rend="superscript">-1</hi>; ref. <ref type="bibr" target="#b17"/>), the amount of latent heat release due to this flow can be very large. This
            heterogeneous heat release at the inner–outer core boundary is likely to have an important effect on the convection pattern in the outer core: hence the inner core may have an
            important influence on the geodynamo through thermal effects, as well as through the effects of geometrical control of the convection pattern<ref type="bibr" target="#b24"/>. For example, the flow
            corresponding to the antisymmetric magnetic field causes excess heat generation (or absorption) at the inner–outer core boundary that has 2θ and 4θ terms, and hence two
            peaks: one major peak (heat flow maximum) at polar regions and a minor peak at the equatorial region. Such a heat flow pattern is consistent with some dynamo calculations<ref type="bibr" target="#b25"/>.</p>
         <p>The present model suggests a strong link between the dynamics of the inner and outer core through mechanical coupling via the Maxwell stress. The Maxwell-stress-induced inner-core dynamics
            provide an explanation for both seismic anisotropy and super-rotation of the inner core<ref type="bibr" target="#b12 b13"/>, and suggests possible effects on geodynamo processes. However, several
            problems remain. First, mineral physics data such as the phase diagram<ref type="bibr" target="#b26"/>, elastic constants<ref type="bibr" target="#b2 b3"/> and the mechanisms of deformation and recrystallization in
            iron in the inner core<ref type="bibr" target="#b4"/> are still poorly constrained. Further studies on these mineral physics issues are required to explore the geodynamic implications of seismic
            anisotropy. Second, it is also important to investigate the effects of large energy release at the inner–outer core boundary on the convection, and hence on the geodynamo processes
            in the outer core. Thermal boundary conditions at the inner–outer core boundary, as well as at the core–mantle boundary<ref type="bibr" target="#b27"/>, may be important in the geodynamo, and
            hence the core may not be a slave of the mantle. In this regard, further studies of the structure and dynamics of the boundary layer between the inner core and outer core are critical to
            our understanding of the mechanisms of feedback between the flow in the inner core and convection in the outer core. Strong feedback may modify the flow pattern in the outermost regions of
            the inner core that corresponds to a given magnetic field. Such a study may provide an explanation for the sharp transition from an isotropic (shallow) layer to an anisotropic (deep) layer
            found by Song and Helmberger<ref type="bibr" target="#b28"/>. Third, there are considerable uncertainties in the magnitude of the magnetic field in the boundary between the inner and the outer cores<ref type="bibr" target="#b23 b24"/>. A significantly smaller magnetic field than assumed here would result in much weaker flow in the inner core. If this was the case, other processes—such as the
            flow caused by gravitational force<ref type="bibr" target="#b19"/>—may make important additional contributions to anisotropy, but the details of these processes have not been investigated.</p>
         <figure xml:id="f1">
            <head>A schematic diagram showing the structure and dynamics of the inner core.</head>
            <figDesc>The dynamics of the outer portion of the inner core (dark-green, thin layer) is dominated by the direct effects of the Lorentz force (the Maxwell stress). The dynamics in
                        the deep portions are controlled by the force balance between the pressure gradient and the viscous force, with a constraint imposed by the boundary conditions near the surface
                        of the inner core which are dominated by the Maxwell stress. The Lorentz force (the Maxwell stress) caused by the toroidal magnetic field squeezes inner-core materials towards
                        the rotation axis, and causes a flow from strong-field regions to weak-field regions. The flow pattern is sensitive to the geometry of the magnetic field (see <ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2</ref>). Black arrows, Lorentz force; red arrows, flow directions; blue lines with arrows, magnetic field lines.</figDesc>
         </figure>
         <figure xml:id="f2">
            <head>Flow field caused by the magnetic field at the boundary between the inner and the outer core.</head>
            <figDesc>Flow velocity vectors in a meridional plane are shown. The geometry of the flow field is determined by the geometry of the magnetic field at the inner–outer core boundary.
                        The flow field corresponding to the Maxwell stress of (panel <hi rend="bold">a</hi>) <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ) = <hi rend="italic">A</hi>(1 -
                            cos2θ)</formula> (corresponding to the symmetric toroidal field) and (panel <hi rend="bold">b</hi>) <formula>σ<hi rend="subscript">M</hi>(θ, φ) =
                                <hi rend="italic">A</hi>(1 - cos 4θ)</formula> (corresponding to the antisymmetric toroidal field) are shown.</figDesc>
         </figure>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="acknowledgements">
            <head>Acknowledgements</head>
            <p>I thank Y. Abe, S. Banerjee, M. Bergman, J. Bloxham, B. Buffett, F. Busse, R. Coe, K. Creager, D. Gubbins, R. Merrill, F. Stacey and D. Stevenson for discussions. This work was
                supported by Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung.</p>
         </div>
         <div type="references">
            <listBibl>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b1">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Anisotropy of the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Song</surname>,<forename type="first">X. D.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Rev. Geophys.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">35</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="297">297</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="313">313</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b2">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">High-pressure elasticity of iron and anisotropy of Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Stixrude</surname>,<forename type="first">L.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Cohen</surname>,<forename type="first">R. E.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">267</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1972">1972</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1975">1975</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b3">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Estimation of single-crystal moduli from X-ray diffraction at high pressure: application to FeO and iron.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Singh</surname>,<forename type="first">A. K.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Mao</surname>,<forename type="first">H-K.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Shu</surname>,<forename type="first">J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Hemley</surname>,<forename type="first">R. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Rev. Lett.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">80</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="2157">2157</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="2160">2160</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b4">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Primary slip system of ε-iron and anisotropy of the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Poirier</surname>,<forename type="first">J-P.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Price</surname>,<forename type="first">G. D.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Planet. Inter.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">110</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="147">147</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="156">156</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b5">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Convection and anisotropy of the inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Jeanloz</surname>,<forename type="first">R.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Wenk</surname>,<forename type="first">H-R.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Geophys. Res. Lett.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">15</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="72">72</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="75">75</biblScope>
                        <date when="1988"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b6">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Inner core anisotropy due to magnetic field-induced preferred orientation of iron.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Karato</surname>,<forename type="first">S.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">262</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1708">1708</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1711">1711</biblScope>
                        <date when="1993"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b7">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Measurements of elastic anisotropy due to solidification texturing and the implications for the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Bergman</surname>,<forename type="first">M. I.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">389</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="60">60</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="63">63</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b8">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Rotation and deformation of the inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Buffett</surname>,<forename type="first">B. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Creager</surname>,<forename type="first">K. C.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Eos</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">79</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="S218">S218</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="S219">S219</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b9">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Growth model of the inner core coupled with outer core dynamics and the resultant elastic anisotropy.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Yoshida</surname>,<forename type="first">S.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Sumita</surname>,<forename type="first">I.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Kumazawa</surname>,<forename type="first">M.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">J. Geophys. Res.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">101</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="28085">28085</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="28103">28103</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b10">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Seismological evidence for the rotation of the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Song</surname>,<forename type="first">X. D.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Richards</surname>,<forename type="first">P. G.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">382</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="221">221</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="224">224</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b11">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Planet within a planet: rotation of the inner core of Earth.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Su</surname>,<forename type="first">W. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Dziewonski</surname>,<forename type="first">A. M.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Jeanloz</surname>,<forename type="first">R.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">274</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1883">1883</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1887">1887</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b12">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Rotation and magnetism of the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Glatzmaier</surname>,<forename type="first">G. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Roberts</surname>,<forename type="first">P. H.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">274</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1887">1887</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1891">1891</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b13">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Anomalous rotation of the inner core and the toroidal magnetic field.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Aurnou</surname>,<forename type="first">J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Brito</surname>,<forename type="first">D.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Olson</surname>,<forename type="first">P.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">J. Geophys. Res.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">103</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="9721">9721</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="9738">9738</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b14">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">A model for sedimentary compaction of a viscous medium and its application to inner-core growth.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Sumita</surname>,<forename type="first">I.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Yoshida</surname>,<forename type="first">S.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Kumazawa</surname>,<forename type="first">M.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Hamano</surname>,<forename type="first">Y.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Geophys. J. Int.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">124</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="502">502</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="524">524</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b15">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Inner core anisotropy: texture as an alternative to a single crystal.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Baumgardner</surname>,<forename type="first">J. R.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Tome</surname>,<forename type="first">C. N.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Lebensohn</surname>,<forename type="first">R.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Wenk</surname>,<forename type="first">H-R.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Eos</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">78</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="F458">F458</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b16">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Implausibility of thermal convection in the Earth's solid inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Yukutake</surname>,<forename type="first">T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Earth Planet. Inter.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">108</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1">1</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="13">13</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b17">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Buffett</surname>,<forename type="first">B. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Mineral Physics and Seismic Tomography</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <publisher/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b18">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Frost</surname>,<forename type="first">H. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Ashby</surname>,<forename type="first">M. F.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Deformation Mechanism Maps</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1982"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b19">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Geodynamic estimates of the viscosity of the Earth's inner core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Buffett</surname>,<forename type="first">B. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">388</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="571">571</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="573">573</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b20">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Chandrasekhar</surname>,<forename type="first">S.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1961"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b21">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">A three-dimensional convective dynamo solution with rotating and finally conducting inner core and mantle.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Glatzmaier</surname>,<forename type="first">G. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Roberts</surname>,<forename type="first">P. H.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Earth Planet. Inter.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">91</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="63">63</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="75">75</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b22">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Generation mechanism of a dipole field by a magnetohydrodynamic dynamo.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Kageyama</surname>,<forename type="first">A.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Sato</surname>,<forename type="first">T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Rev. E</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">55</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="4617">4617</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="4626">4626</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b23">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Merrill</surname>,<forename type="first">R. T.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>McElhinney</surname>,<forename type="first">M. W.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>McFaddon</surname>,<forename type="first">P. L.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">The Magnetic Field of the Earth</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b24">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Magnetoconvection in a rotating spherical shell: structure of flow in the outer core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Olson</surname>,<forename type="first">P.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Glatzmaier</surname>,<forename type="first">G. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phys. Earth Planet. Inter.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">92</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="109">109</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="118">118</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b25">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Numerical modeling of the geodynamo: Mechanisms of field generation and equilibration.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Olson</surname>,<forename type="first">P.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Christensen</surname>,<forename type="first">U.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Glatzmaier</surname>,<forename type="first">G. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">J. Geophys. Res.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">104</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="10383">10383</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="10404">10404</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b26">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Phase diagram of iron by in-situ X-ray diffraction: implications for Earth's core.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Yoo</surname>,<forename type="first">C. S.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Akella</surname>,<forename type="first">J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Campbell</surname>,<forename type="first">A. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Mao</surname>,<forename type="first">H.-K.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Hemley</surname>,<forename type="first">R. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">270</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1473">1473</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1475">1475</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b27">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Magnetoconvection and thermal coupling of the Earth's core and mantle.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Olson</surname>,<forename type="first">P.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Glatzmaier</surname>,<forename type="first">G. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">354</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1413">1413</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1424">1424</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b28">
                  <analytic>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Seismic evidence for an inner core transition zone.</title>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Song</surname>,<forename type="first">X.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Helmberger</surname>,<forename type="first">D. V.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">282</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="924">924</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="927">927</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
            </listBibl>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
