<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">The neurobiology of cognition</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Nature Publishing Group</publisher>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct>
               <analytic>
                  <author xml:id="author-0000">
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">M. James</forename>
                        <surname>Nichols</surname>
                        <forename full="init">M J</forename>
                     </persName>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="institution"> Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <settlement>Stanford</settlement>
                           <region>California</region>
                           <postCode> 94305</postCode>
                           <country key="US">UNITED STATES</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <author xml:id="author-0001">
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">William T.</forename>
                        <surname>Newsome</surname>
                        <forename full="init">W T</forename>
                     </persName>
                     <email>bill@monkeybiz.stanford.edu</email>
                     <affiliation>e-mail: bill@monkeybiz.stanford.edu</affiliation>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="institution"> Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <settlement>Stanford</settlement>
                           <region>California</region>
                           <postCode> 94305</postCode>
                           <country key="US">UNITED STATES</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">The neurobiology of cognition</title>
                  <idno type="articleId">35011531</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                  <title level="j" type="sub">Impacts of foreseeable science</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0028-0836</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <date when="1999-12-02"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">402</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">6761supp</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="C35">C35</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="C38">C38</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>It is astounding that cognition and emotion — phenomena that cannot be duplicated in our most sophisticated computers — arise naturally from the electrical activity of large systems
   of neurons within the brain. Scientific investigation of these phenomena is inherently interdisciplinary, drawing strength from fields as diverse as neurophysiology, cognitive psychology and
   computational theory. Exciting new findings have emerged in recent decades concerning the neural underpinnings of cognitive functions such as perception, learning, memory, attention,
   decision-making, language and motor planning, as well as the influence of emotion and motivation upon cognition. With very few exceptions, however, our understanding of these phenomena remains
   rudimentary. We can identify particular locations in the brain where neuronal activity is modulated in concert with particular external or internal stimuli. In some cases we can even artificially
   manipulate neural activity in a specific brain structure (using electrical or pharmacological techniques) and cause predictable changes in behaviour. But we encounter substantial difficulties in
   understanding how modulations in neural activity at one point in the nervous system are actually produced by synaptic interactions between neural systems. Thus our current state of knowledge is
   somewhat akin to looking out the window of an airplane at night. We can see patches of light from cities and towns scattered across the landscape, we know that roads, railways and telephone wires
   connect those cities, but we gain little sense of the social, political and economic interactions within and between cities that define a functioning society. </p>
         <p>To achieve a more sophisticated level of understanding, investigators must develop new experimental techniques for studying functional interactions between neurons and systems of neurons, and new
   models for understanding the behaviour of complex, dynamic systems like the brain. Whether major breakthroughs occur on the timescale of years or decades depends substantially on success in
   developing these new techniques. Irrespective of timescale, an increasingly sophisticated understanding of the neural basis of cognition will influence our society profoundly. It will have
   practical applications such as treatment of mental disease and the design of intelligent machines, and will raise contentious social issues such as the freedom of each individual to choose their
   behaviour, and the extent to which society can reasonably demand individual responsibility for behaviour.</p>
         <p>In what follows, we address three questions. What sorts of cognitive phenomena do neuroscientists seek to explain in terms of brain function? What form do our explanations take, and what
   technical advances are round the corner to help us? And what are the personal and social implications of understanding the neural underpinnings of consciousness and mental functions?</p>
         <p>The following example of visually based cognition illustrates some of the mental phenomena that neuroscientists seek to understand. Imagine a girl standing before a picnic table (<ref type="figure" target="#f1">Fig. 1</ref>), scrutinizing a jumble of apples in search of the biggest and best granny smith, her favourite kind. She looks, finds one, reaches out and grabs it. The action seems
   straightforward enough, but this simple description belies the enormous complexity the brain faces in perceiving the scene, deciding on a course of action, and then executing it.</p>
         <p>The brain has no direct access to the rich array of objects and surfaces in the three-dimensional visual environment; it must reconstruct the scene from complex, two-dimensional images falling on
   the two retinae. Consider just three of the many problems the visual system must solve in scene reconstruction. First, although the retinal images are flat, accurate depth perception is critical
   for assessing the shapes and sizes of the apples, and for reaching accurately to grab the selected apple. The brain reconstructs the third dimension from multiple cues in the retinal image. For
   example, the brain can infer depth based on the slight disparity between the images an object casts on the two retinae. Second, in order to pick out the largest apple, the girl must accurately
   assess the size of each apple. Yet the size of an apple's image on her retina depends on its distance from her. Her visual system takes distance into account and automatically estimates the true
   physical sizes of objects at different distances, a perceptual phenomenon known as size constancy. Third, the apple scene contains a kaleidoscope of contours: texture elements, colour boundaries,
   shadows, reflections, specks of dirt, and so on. Only a fraction of these delineate the true boundaries of objects, however, and the brain must sort these out (contour extraction) in order to
   identify objects accurately.</p>
         <p>Once the girl's visual system reconstructs an accurate representation of the scene, a higher-level decision process must evaluate the perceptual information and select one apple in particular.
   More specifically, her brain must categorize the apples (granny smith, red delicious and so on), assign appropriate affective associations (likes and dislikes) to them, deploy spatial attention to
   salient objects in the scene, and discriminate fine differences in colour, size and shape to select the best of the granny smiths. Thus, the girl's decision is shaped by immediate sensory
   information, by previously learned categories drawn from visual memory, and by likes and dislikes based on accumulated experience. Other elements in the scene that are totally irrelevant to the
   decision must be ignored. Finally, once the brain reconstructs the scene and makes a decision, voluntary movement systems must plan and execute the appropriate behavioural response (reaching for
   the selected apple).</p>
         <p>Thus, choosing an apple from an apple cart, like innumerable actions we carry out every day, involves a surprising array of cognitive functions. Scientists would like to understand the neural
   mechanisms that underlie those functions.</p>
         <p>Understanding the neural basis of a specific cognitive function typically begins with behavioural observations and hypotheses developed by perceptual and cognitive psychologists. Equipped with
   sound conceptual frameworks originating in behaviour, neurophysiologists can then study underlying brain function at several levels. We will describe three of the most important levels:
   localization, representation and microcircuitry.</p>
         <p>At the coarsest level, the primary issue is ‘localization’ of function: identifying, for example, neural systems in the brain that are strongly active in response to visual images or
   when spatial attention is deployed to different regions of a visual scene. As illustrated in <ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2a</ref>, localization of function has been a dominant theme in brain science,
   beginning in the nineteenth century when ‘phrenologists’ attempted to map mental functions onto the brain by correlating aspects of personality and mental ability with the sizes of
   bumps at different locations on the skull. More reliable evidence for localization of function emerged in the early part of the twentieth century as neurologists learned to recognize mental
   deficits (sometimes highly specific) that occurred subsequent to damage in particular regions of the brain.</p>
         <p>The most commonly used techniques in modern studies of localization are positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which generate most of the glossy
   figures in popular science magazines that depict mental activity as coloured blobs on a picture of the brain. Both PET and fMRI measure changes in blood flow to specific regions of the brain while
   human subjects perform various cognitive tasks<ref type="bibr" target="#b1"/>. The blood flow signal is assumed to reflect changes in metabolic demand resulting from altered levels of neural activity. Using PET
   and fMRI, investigators can study brain activity in humans at the spatial scale of individual brain structures (a few millimetres) and on a timescale of a few seconds.</p>
         <p>The recent avalanche of PET and fMRI papers has produced many insights concerning localization of mental functions (<ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2b</ref>)<ref type="bibr" target="#b2 b3 b4"/>. Although they are
   substantially more informative than previous findings based on brain damage, distillations of data like the one in <ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2b</ref> are disconcertingly similar to the
   one-function-one-brain-area maps of the phrenologists. Will we ‘understand’ the brain when the map in <ref type="figure" target="#f2">Fig. 2b</ref> is completely filled with blobs? Obviously not;
   localization data provide little insight into the exact nature of the signals encoded in a given structure, the computations being performed and the interactions between different structures.</p>
         <p>Greater insight into how the brain processes and represents information can be obtained by finer-grained studies of individual brain structures using microelectrodes. With these techniques,
   investigators can measure directly the electrical activity of individual neurons (<ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3a</ref>), or of small, functionally related clusters of neurons called ‘cortical
   columns’. For example, <ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3b</ref> schematizes the electrical discharges (black vertical tick marks) of a cortical neuron that responds vigorously to a bar of light sweeping
   downward across a viewing screen, but not to upward motion of the bar. This neuron, therefore, is ‘selective’ for downward visual motion. Other neurons are selective for other
   directions of motion, specific colours, the orientation of line segments, the density of visual texture and many other visual features. Their selectivity allows them to signal or represent the
   presence or absence of particular features in the visual environment. This ‘representational’ level of analysis has provided some of the major success stories of systems
    neuroscience<ref type="bibr" target="#b5 b6"/>, including descriptions of early stages of visual processing relevant to the problems of contour extraction and depth perception described in the preceding
   section.</p>
         <p>Investigation at the representational level is particularly powerful when carried out in alert animals trained to perform interesting cognitive tasks. For example, researchers have discovered
   that certain neurons in the temporal and frontal lobes of the brain are active during short-term memories of specific objects or places<ref type="bibr" target="#b7 b8 b9"/>, whereas other neurons in the parietal
   lobe respond dramatically when the animal deploys attention to one or another region of a visual scene<ref type="bibr" target="#b10 b11 b12"/>. These functional properties can change strikingly from one cortical
   column to the next within a given brain area (a spatial scale of several tens of micrometres), revealing an intricate level of organization invisible to fMRI and PET.</p>
         <p>These discoveries provide researchers with a deeper ‘point of entry’ for analysis of the neural systems underlying a particular cognitive function. Transformations in the information
   carried by single neurons can be inferred by recording from successive brain areas in a particular pathway while the animal performs a task. On the basis of such measurements, investigators can
   develop quantitative models of how these transformations take place. Furthermore, investigators can test hypotheses about the function of a particular pathway by applying electrical or
   pharmacological techniques to activate or inactivate discrete clusters of neurons. In our laboratory, for example, we have found that electrically activating clusters of direction-selective neurons
   through a microelectrode (<ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3a</ref>) can induce rhesus monkeys to report seeing motion in the direction encoded by the activated neurons<ref type="bibr" target="#b13"/>. Results of this sort,
   perhaps more decisively than any others, establish a causal link between the activity of particular classes of neurons and specific mental phenomena.</p>
         <p>But even this level of analysis begs fundamental questions about how signals are created, encoded and transmitted by single neurons and assemblies of neurons. Individual cortical neurons (like
   the one in <ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3a</ref>) receive input signals from as many as three to ten thousand other neurons. In a typical experiment, however, the neurophysiologist can characterize the
   responses of only a few neurons at the tip of the electrode. With such a limited data set, it is difficult to determine exactly how the thousands of synaptic inputs to a cell are transformed to
   create the cell's pattern of output activity.</p>
         <p>This third level of analysis — the detailed ‘microcircuitry’ and dynamic interactions that give rise to the observed activity of single neurons — is the most vexing for
   systems and cognitive neuroscience. The challenge stems in part from the extreme complexity of even a single cortical neuron, and in part from daunting practical problems of physical accessibility
   and visualization in an intact, behaving animal. Elegant intracellular recording techniques can be used to study interactions between neurons in simple preparations (for example, thin slices of
   tissue removed from the brain, or simple invertebrate nervous systems). The sequence of images in <ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3c</ref>, for example, shows synaptic events within individual compartments of
   a single cell in the brain of the common housefly. Each compartment receives synaptic signals from a different input neuron. This neuron is selective for downward visual motion, just like the one
   in <ref type="figure" target="#f3">Fig. 3b</ref>. In the fly brain, however, it is possible to monitor activity sweeping through the individual compartments of the cell as a bar is swept downward through the
   visual field. Observations of this kind will shed light on how individual neurons transform the input signals they receive from other neurons into an output signal. Even so, understanding the
   neural microcircuitry underlying complex cognitive phenomena like decision-making in mammals seems a distant hope, although new technical advances could substantially influence this level of
   analysis.</p>
         <p>The immediate impediments to progress in systems and cognitive neuroscience are more technical than conceptual. Computational theorists and psychologists have developed plausible models for many
   cognitive functions; our primary problem lies in acquiring and analysing the neural data needed to evaluate these models. It will be a sign of real progress if this situation reverses over the next
   two decades, with conceptual issues coming to the fore.</p>
         <p>Technical innovation is needed at all levels of analysis. At the level of localization, improvements in fMRI technology could permit study at the spatial resolution of the cortical column, where
   so much functional specialization resides. This capability is possible in principle and should emerge gradually over the next decade. More problematic, however, is the temporal resolution of fMRI,
   which is limited by blood-flow dynamics to a scale of seconds. Neural processing, in contrast, occurs on a scale of milliseconds. Our best prospects for recovering temporal resolution lie in
   combining fMRI with techniques that measure electrical activity directly, such as evoked potential recording<ref type="bibr" target="#b14"/> and magnetoencephalography<ref type="bibr" target="#b15"/>.</p>
         <p>At the level of representational analysis, multi-electrode recording techniques are enabling investigators to obtain data simultaneously from larger populations of neurons, and may provide the
   most promising approach for analysing dynamic interactions between cortical areas.</p>
         <p>Optical techniques are likely to become increasingly important both at the representational level of analysis and at the local circuit level. Currently, CCD cameras are capable of gathering
   reflected (or fluorescent) light from the brain surface, thereby enabling study of brain function at the level of individual cortical columns<ref type="bibr" target="#b16"/>. Study of single neuron dynamics will
   increasingly rely on multi-photon microscopy, which can isolate signals from individual cells <hi rend="italic">in vivo</hi> hundreds of microns below the cortical surface<ref type="bibr" target="#b17"/>. Focal stimulation of
   individual neurons will increasingly involve optical release of caged neurotransmitters<ref type="bibr" target="#b18"/>. The rapid development of new optical probes, caged neuroactive compounds, and light sources
   and detectors will extend current resolution limits and may permit the application of optical methods to alert animals.</p>
         <p>Progress in understanding higher brain functions, fuelled by technological innovation, will certainly exert a major impact on society in the coming century. New discoveries will be important for
   the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric and neurological disease, for improving human learning and communication and for informing the design of intelligent machines. But a scientific
   understanding of the human mind and human behaviour in terms of brain function could also have a profound impact on how we understand ourselves and our society. Two aspects of mentality deserve
   special consideration: conscious experience and decision-making.</p>
         <p>The relationship between conscious experience and brain function is one of the great remaining mysteries of the natural world. How can three pounds of tissue that scientists study with
   microelectrodes, microscopes and magnetic resonance machines give rise to conscious experience? Indeed, what exactly do we mean by ‘conscious experience’?</p>
         <p>A classic thought experiment<ref type="bibr" target="#b19 b20"/> illustrates the problem. Imagine a time in the future when visual neuroscience has come to completion, when everything is known about how the
   nervous system responds to light and how it produces visually guided behaviour. Now imagine a colour-blind neuroscientist in this golden era who can give a complete account of the neural events
   underlying a normal observer's ability to discriminate and identify colours. Now suppose our scientist's colour-blindness were miraculously cured and he saw green for the first time. The question
   is, would he learn anything new about colour perception? Most would answer ‘yes’: what he learns is precisely the conscious experience of colour. Consciousness is the aspect of our
   mental life that we can only understand through subjective first-person experience. </p>
         <p>Can we study consciousness scientifically? This is controversial among researchers, but we believe that progress will occur only if investigators can develop operational definitions of conscious
   experience, as has been accomplished for other aspects of cognition. In a classical form of learning, for example, Pavlov's dog generated a measurable dependent behaviour (salivation) in response
   to controlled manipulation of independent variables (pairing of bell with food). In general, we can hope to understand the neural basis of any cognitive phenomenon that can be defined operationally
   in a similar manner.</p>
         <p>Accomplishing this for consciousness will be difficult, because conscious experience is intrinsically subjective. A person's verbal reports of her conscious experiences may be sufficiently
   reliable to serve as objective observations for testing hypotheses about consciousness. But the notion that verbal reports (or any other overt behaviour) are an adequate proxy for conscious
   experiences is itself not scientifically testable. We must therefore acknowledge that this assumption is extra-scientific (as is parsimony, another favourite assumption of scientists). Even if we
   do accept this assumption in general, verbal reports may fall short under some circumstances. For example, if one person reacts to pain more readily than another, is it because he has a more
   intense sensation of pain, or because his threshold for reacting to pain is lower? Could any verbal exchange answer such questions? Although animals can be trained to perform simple behavioural
   tasks, these sorts of questions only become more perplexing without the benefit of language. Therefore, any measure of consciousness in animals is likely to be controversial, despite the common
   intuition that the family dog enjoys conscious experiences of one sort or another.</p>
         <p>Ultimately, no matter how precisely we manage to link verbal reports of conscious experience to brain activity, fundamental mysteries are likely to persist<ref type="bibr" target="#b21"/>. Exactly how something
   as ineffable as subjective consciousness can arise from macromolecules, synapses and action potentials may well remain a conundrum.</p>
         <p>An exciting frontier in the study of higher brain function is the attempt to understand mechanistically how decisions are formed. ‘Decision processes’ are the key cognitive links
   between perception and action. Perceptual processes carry out the functions of scene reconstruction, contour extraction, and so on, and motor processes implement the planning and execution of a
   behavioural response. Intermediate levels of the system, however, must evaluate the sensory evidence represented in early cortical areas, and ‘decide’ , for example, which apple is to
   be the target of a reaching movement.</p>
         <p>Neurophysiologists have now begun to investigate the neural underpinnings of decision processes in monkeys trained to perform simple discrimination tasks. By recording at successive stages of
   known anatomical pathways linking sensory to motor areas of the cortex, investigators have uncovered intriguing evidence for neural systems that represent what the monkey ‘decides’
   about the stimulus as opposed to what the stimulus actually is<ref type="bibr" target="#b22 b23 b24"/>. The neural activity recorded in such experiments can actually predict the outcome of the monkey's decision
   several seconds before it is revealed by a behavioural response. In addition, neurophysiologists are now taking notice of a fact that psychologists and economists have long recognized: decisions
   are informed as much by reward expectation and personal history as by the sensory evidence available at any given time. If, for example, an animal knows from past experience that choice A tends to
   be rewarded more frequently than choice B, it may choose A even if countervailing sensory evidence suggests that choice B will be rewarded on the current trial. Important new discoveries have been
   made concerning neural signals related to reward expectation and relative reward potency<ref type="bibr" target="#b25 b26 b27"/>; indeed such signals have been found in the inferior parietal cortex of
    monkeys<ref type="bibr" target="#b28"/>, a cortical region implicated in perceptual decision-making.</p>
         <p>The next decade will certainly witness substantial progress in understanding how decisions are formed within the brain, but these studies in particular raise disquieting questions. The crux of
   the problem lies in the implications of physical determinism for our concepts of personal freedom and moral responsibility. If the most sophisticated aspects of our mental lives, from decisions as
   trivial as selecting an apple to those as important as choosing a spouse, are determined by the molecular and cellular events that generate electrical activity in the nervous system, what are we to
   make of our subjective experience of freedom? If our sense of freedom in making moral decisions is illusory, can anyone reasonably be held responsible for his or her actions? Can a criminal
   reasonably be punished for actions over which he has no meaningful control? </p>
         <p>We have no solution to this problem, but several perspectives seem important to bear in mind. The most significant, perhaps, is that both points of view — physical determinism and personal
   freedom — are utterly essential in humanity's attempt to understand itself. The assumption of cause-and-effect determinism is fundamental not only to science but also to everyday life. For
   example, every day most of us must negotiate streets full of busy traffic in order to survive until the next day. The basic perceptual, decision-making and motor mechanisms within our brains must
   be sufficiently deterministic that we take the appropriate action every time. Furthermore, the assumption of determinism underlies our hope of finding cures for devastating psychiatric and
   neurological diseases. If these conditions do not have physical causes within the brain, there is no reason to hope that they can be cured by physical (that is, medical) interventions.</p>
         <p>On the other hand, the assumption of a meaningful degree of personal freedom is essential not only to our personal and social lives, but to science as well. Scientists require the freedom to
   evaluate data and to reject false hypotheses. But if our mental processes unfold with the physical determinism of a machine, what guarantee do we have that the beliefs the machine generates, by the
   scientific method or otherwise, are true? And if the machine generates false beliefs (the belief in determinism, perhaps?) how would we discard them? We are left, then, with the paradox that both
   perspectives seem necessary, for the community of science as well as for everyday life. Perhaps these perspectives will be reconciled at some point in the future. For the present, our only obvious
   option is to live with both, and accept the paradox as a leavening dose of humility in our intellectual lives.</p>
         <figure xml:id="f1">
            <head>Visual scene of apples on a picnic table.</head>
            <p>Photograph by David G. Muir.</p>
         </figure>
         <figure xml:id="f2">
            <head>Localization of mental functions.</head>
            <figDesc>
               <hi rend="bold">a</hi>, According to nineteenth-century phrenologists, lumps on the skull revealed the locations in the brain responsible for mental functions like ‘agreeableness’ in the frontal
      lobe and ‘cautiousness’ in the parietal lobe. <hi rend="bold">b</hi>, PET and fMRI studies, which measure changes in cerebral blood flow while various perceptual and cognitive tasks are performed,
      have revealed a different organization.</figDesc>
            <p>Imaging data assembled by C. J. Doane.</p>
         </figure>
         <figure xml:id="f3">
            <head>Illustration of the representational and microcircuit levels of analysis. </head>
            <figDesc>
               <hi rend="bold">a</hi>, Pyramidal neurons in monkey visual cortex, stained by the Golgi method. A tungsten microelectrode typically used for extracellular recording has been superimposed (image from
       <ref type="bibr" target="#b5"/>). <hi rend="bold"> b</hi>, Schematic of a bar stimulus (blue bar) moving either up or down and the response of a direction-selective neuron. Black tick marks represent the
      electrical discharges of the neuron. The neuron is direction selective, discharging more vigorously for downward motion than for upward motion. c, Tangential cell in a housefly in response to a
      bar moving downward in the visual field (the preferred direction for that cell). The cell was filled with calcium green, which fluoresces in response to influxes of calcium caused by synaptic
      inputs from other neurons. The four images represent four successive 1-second intervals as the bar sweeps through the visual field producing electrical changes in different spatial compartments
      of the cell (S. Single and A. Borst, unpublished data).</figDesc>
         </figure>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="acknowledgements">
            <head>Acknowledgements</head>
            <p>We thank M. Schnitzer for useful suggestions during the preparation of the manuscript.</p>
         </div>
         <div type="references">
            <listBibl>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b1">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Ogawa</surname>, <forename type="first">S.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">89</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="5951">5951</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to=" 5955"> 5955</biblScope>
                        <date when="1992"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b2">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Posner</surname>, <forename type="first">M. I.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Raichle</surname>, <forename type="first">M. E.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol"> 95</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="763">763</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="764">764</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b3">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Sell</surname>, <forename type="first">L. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Eur. J. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">11</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1042">1042</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to=" 1048"> 1048</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b4">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Wandell</surname>, <forename type="first">B. A.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Annu. Rev. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">22</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="145">145</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="173">173</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b5">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Hubel</surname>, <forename type="first">D. H.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main"> Eye, Brain, and Vision</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b6">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Parker</surname>, <forename type="first">A. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Newsome</surname>, <forename type="first">W. T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Annu. Rev. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol"> 21</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="227">227</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="277">277</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b7">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Tanaka</surname>, <forename type="first">K.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">2</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="502">502</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="505">505</biblScope>
                        <date when="1992"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b8">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Fuster</surname>, <forename type="first">J. M.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main"> Memory in the Cerebral Cortex</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b9">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Goldman-Rakic</surname>, <forename type="first">P. S.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">9</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="13473">13473</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to=" 13480"> 13480</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b10">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Desimone</surname>, <forename type="first">R.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Duncan</surname>, <forename type="first">J.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Annu. Rev. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol"> 18</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="193">193</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="222">222</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b11">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Maunsell</surname>, <forename type="first">J. H.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">270</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="764">764</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="769">769</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b12">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Colby</surname>, <forename type="first">C. L.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Goldberg</surname>, <forename type="first">M. E.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Annu. Rev. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol"> 22</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="319">319</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="349">349</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b13">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Salzman</surname>, <forename type="first">C. D.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Murasugi</surname>, <forename type="first">C. M.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Britten</surname>, <forename type="first"> K. H.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Newsome</surname>, <forename type="first">W. T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> J. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">12</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="2331">2331</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="2355">2355</biblScope>
                        <date when="1992"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b14">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Martinez</surname>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Nature Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">2</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="364">364</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="369">369</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b15">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>George</surname>, <forename type="first">J. S.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">J. Clin. Neurophysiol.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">12</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="406">406</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to=" 431"> 431</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b16">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Hubener</surname>, <forename type="first">M.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Shoham</surname>, <forename type="first">D.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Grinvald</surname>, <forename type="first">A.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Bonhoeffer</surname>,
       <forename type="first">T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">J. Neurosci. </title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">17</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="9270">9270</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="9284">9284</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b17">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Svoboda</surname>, <forename type="first">K.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Helmchen</surname>, <forename type="first">F.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Denk</surname>, <forename type="first">W.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Tank</surname>, <forename type="first">D.
       W.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Nature Neurosci. </title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">2</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="65">65</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="73">73</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b18">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Wang</surname>, <forename type="first">S. S.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Augustine</surname>, <forename type="first">G. J.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Neuron</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">15</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from=" 755"> 755</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="760">760</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b19">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Jackson</surname>, <forename type="first">F.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Phil. Quarterly</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">32</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="127">127</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="136">136</biblScope>
                        <date when="1982"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b20">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Thompson</surname>, <forename type="first">E.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Phil. Studies</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">68</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="321">321</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="349">349</biblScope>
                        <date when="1992"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b21">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Nagel</surname>, <forename type="first">T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Phil. Rev.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">4</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="435">435</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="450">450</biblScope>
                        <date when="1974"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b22">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Shadlen</surname>, <forename type="first">M. N.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Newsome</surname>, <forename type="first">W. T.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">93</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="628">628</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="633">633</biblScope>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b23">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Romo</surname>, <forename type="first">R.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Salinas</surname>, <forename type="first">E.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol"> 9</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="487">487</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="493">493</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b24">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Schall</surname>, <forename type="first">J. D.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Thompson</surname>, <forename type="first">K. G.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Annu. Rev. Neurosci.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">22</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="241">241</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="260">260</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b25">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Gallistel</surname>, <forename type="first">C. R.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> Cognition</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">50</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="151">151</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="170">170</biblScope>
                        <date when="1994"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b26">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Schultz</surname>, <forename type="first">W.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Dayan</surname>, <forename type="first">P.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Montague</surname>, <forename type="first"> P. R.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Science</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">275</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1593">1593</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to=" 1599"> 1599</biblScope>
                        <date when="1997"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b27">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Schultz</surname>, <forename type="first">W.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main"> J. Neurophysiol.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">80</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1">1</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="27">27</biblScope>
                        <date when="1998"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct xml:id="b28">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <surname>Platt</surname>, <forename type="first">M. L.</forename>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <surname> Glimcher</surname>, <forename type="first">P. W.</forename>
                     </author>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Nature</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">400</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from=" 233"> 233</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="238">238</biblScope>
                        <date when="1999"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
            </listBibl>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
