<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="en"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title level="a" type="main">A physically based constitutive model for a V–4Cr–4Ti
            alloy</title></titleStmt><publicationStmt><availability status="full-transfer"><p><date>2000</date></p></availability></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><biblStruct><analytic><author type="corresp"><persName><forename type="first">E.G.</forename><surname>Donahue</surname></persName><email>donahue@engineering.ucsb.edu</email><affiliation><orgName type="department">Department of Mechanical and Environmental Engineering</orgName><orgName type="institution">University of California</orgName><address><addrLine>Santa Barbara</addrLine><addrLine>CA 93106</addrLine><country key="US">UNITED STATES</country></address><address><country key=""/></address></affiliation><ref target="#CORR1">*</ref></author><author><persName><forename type="first">G.R.</forename><surname>Odette</surname></persName><affiliation><orgName type="department">Department of Mechanical and Environmental Engineering</orgName><orgName type="institution">University of California</orgName><address><addrLine>Santa Barbara</addrLine><addrLine>CA 93106</addrLine><country key="US">UNITED STATES</country></address></affiliation></author><author><persName><forename type="first">G.E.</forename><surname>Lucas</surname></persName><affiliation><orgName type="department">Department of Mechanical and Environmental Engineering</orgName><orgName type="institution">University of California</orgName><address><addrLine>Santa Barbara</addrLine><addrLine>CA 93106</addrLine><country key="US">UNITED STATES</country></address></affiliation></author><title level="a" type="main">A physically based constitutive model for a V–4Cr–4Ti
            alloy</title></analytic><monogr><title level="j" type="abbrev">NUMA</title><imprint/></monogr><idno type="DOI">10.1016/S0022-3115(00)00275-0</idno><idno type="PII">S0022-3115(00)00275-0</idno><idno type="publisherID">14140</idno></biblStruct></sourceDesc></fileDesc><profileDesc><textClass><keywords><list>
            <head>Keywords</head>
            <item><term>
                V01
            </term></item>
            <item><term>
                M03
            </term></item>
            <item><term>
                D05
            </term></item>
        </list></keywords></textClass></profileDesc></teiHeader><text><front><div type="abstract">
            <head>Abstract</head>
            
                <p>A constitutive model for low-to-intermediate temperatures, strains,
                    and strain rates is developed for the program heat of V–4Cr–4Ti.
                    The basic form of the model is derived from more general dislocation-based
                    models of yield stress and strain hardening. The physically based forms are fit
                    to a database derived from tensile tests carried out over a wide range of
                    temperatures and strain rates. Yield and post-yield strain-hardening
                    contributions to the flow stress are additive. The yield stress has both
                    thermally activated and athermal components. The former is described by a
                    two-mechanism activated dislocation slip model, with contributions that appear
                    to arise from both lattice friction (at lower temperatures) and dislocation
                    pinning by interstitial impurities (at higher temperatures). The yield stress
                    data can be correlated using a strain rate-compensated temperature. The model
                    uses a temperature-weighted average of the two mechanisms. Post-yield strain
                    hardening was found to be approximately athermal. Strain hardening is fit to a
                    two-component modified Voce-type saturating flow stress model. The constitutive
                    model is also used to determine the flow stability limits as estimates of
                    uniform tensile strains. The relatively compact, but mechanism-based,
                    semi-empirical model has a number of both fundamental and practical advantages
                    that are briefly outlined.</p>
            
        </div></front><body><div type="ElsevierSections">
            <div n="1"><head>Introduction</head><p>It is axiomatic that 21st century fusion technology will employ
                    sophisticated design and structural assessment tools that require a complete,
                    accurate and well-understood characterization of the mechanical behavior of the
                    constituent structural materials. The basic stress–strain, or
                    constitutive laws, are one of several key parts of the requisite property
                    database, and are the focus of this paper. In the simplest case of current code
                    compliance assessments, the constitutive database might be comprised simply of
                    tabulations of strength and so-called ductility `properties' derived from
                    standard tensile tests. However, standard engineering tensile properties,
                    involving ill-defined measures of ductility, are insufficient to support more
                    rigorous finite element method (FEM) simulations of the detailed behavior of
                    complex structural configurations.</p><p>Constitutive properties are also required to measure, apply and obtain a
                    basic understanding of the long list of life-limiting failure-related properties
                    and parameters, such as fracture toughness. The property database must also
                    characterize the multiple in-service changes that are controlled by combinations
                    of a very large number of environmental and as-fabricated material variables.
                    Creation of such information is enormously time consuming and expensive. Thus,
                    it is absolutely imperative that data development and analysis efforts be
                    consistent with rapidly evolving designs and integrity assessment
                    methods.</p><p>In this work, we develop a constitutive description of a
                    V–4Cr–4Ti alloy in the <hi rend="italic">unirradiated</hi>
                    condition for low-to-intermediate temperatures and strain rates (i.e., outside
                    the creep and strain aging regimes). Specifically, we seek a model that
                    accurately and compactly describes the effects of temperature
                        (<hi rend="italic">T</hi>), strain rate (<formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                            <ac>ε</ac>
                            <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>) and strain
                        (<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>) on the uniaxial flow stress, <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>fl</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                            <ac>ε</ac>
                            <ac>̇</ac></a>,ε</math></formula>). While not directly derived from
                    first-principle theories, a second key objective is that the simple state
                    variable model be physically based and consistent with the current understanding
                    of the underlying dislocation deformation mechanisms and mechanics.</p><p>The research involved three steps: (a) measuring and properly reducing the
                    requisite tensile database; (b) analyzing the general data trends in the context
                    of simple but physically based, analytical formulations of constitutive models;
                    and (c) quantitatively fitting the model equations to the database.</p></div>
            <div n="2"><head>Experimental procedures and data reduction</head><p>Flat, dog-bone tensile specimens with a 9.0–0.5–2.0 mm
                    long–thick–wide gauge section were prepared from a large, 500 kg
                    heat (Heat No. 832665) of V–4Cr–4Ti manufactured by Teledyne
                    Wah-Chang <ref target="#BIB1">[1]</ref>. Starting at a thickness
                    of 1.07 mm, an annealed sheet was cold rolled by collaborators at ORNL at less
                    that 5% per pass to a final thickness of 0.5 mm with an intermediate heat
                    treatment at 0.86 mm of 1000°C for 2 h in vacuum. Following the final
                    cold work of about 40%, the miniature tensile specimens were punched from the
                    sheet with their axis perpendicular to the rolling direction. The specimens were
                    then annealed at 1000°C for 2 h in vacuum. This processing resulted in an
                    average grain size of 25 μm and an average Vickers microhardness of
                        150±5 <ref target="#BIB2 #BIB3">[2,3]</ref>.</p><p>Tensile tests were performed on a 100 kN MTS load frame with a 556
                    servo-hydraulic controller using a clamp-and-pin gripping system. Tests were
                    conducted at 10 temperatures ranging from −196°C to 100°C.
                    The desired temperatures were maintained by liquid bath (−70°C to
                    0°C), chilled-air baths (⩽−100°C), or by a small
                    furnace (&gt;20°C). Temperatures were measured by a thermocouple in contact
                    with the specimen to within ±2°C. Strains were determined by LVDT
                    measurements of the actuator displacement using compliance corrections provided
                    by the slope of the elastic load-displacement curve. The tests were conducted at
                    three nominal strain rates (<formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                            <ac>ε</ac>
                            <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>) of 4×10<hi rend="superscript">−4</hi>,
                    0.04 and 2 s<hi rend="superscript">−1</hi>. Engineering stress
                        (<hi rend="italic">s</hi>) and strain (<hi rend="italic">e</hi>) were
                    converted to their true stress
                        (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>)–strain
                        (<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>) equivalents using the standard relations,
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>=<hi rend="italic">s</hi>(1+<hi rend="italic">e</hi>)
                    and <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>=ln(1+<hi rend="italic">e</hi>). The yield
                    stress (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>) was defined at the
                    0.2% modulus offset or, when present, at the Luder’s plateau. The uniform
                    and total engineering strains were measured at peak and fracture loads,
                    respectively.</p><p>A total of 32 specimens were tested. Owing to the limited number of
                    specimens, usually only one test was conducted for each condition, and not all
                    temperature–strain rate conditions were included. Since the data were
                    analyzed collectively, these limitations are not considered to be significant to
                    fitting the overall constitutive model. Redundant tests showed a standard
                    deviation in <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> of about 14 MPa.
                    Where they overlap, our results are also generally consistent with a study by
                    Rowcliffe et al. which emphasized the regime above room temperature
                        <ref target="#BIB4">[4]</ref>.</p></div>
            <div n="3"><head>Results and analysis</head><p>Representative stress–strain curves have been reported previously
                        <ref target="#BIB5">[5]</ref>. Following Armstrong
                        <ref target="#BIB6">[6]</ref>, the flow stress
                        (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>) is divided into yield
                        (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>) and post-yield
                    strain-hardening (<hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi>)
                    contributions. The <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> is composed
                    of both temperature–strain rate sensitive and insensitive or, thermally
                    activated (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi>) and athermal
                        (<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">ya</hi>) components,
                    respectively as<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                    <ac>ε</ac>
                                    <ac>̇</ac></a>)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>yt</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                    <ac>ε</ac>
                                    <ac>̇</ac></a>)+σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>ya</rm></inf>.</math></formula></formula></display>The
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> is due to the lattice
                    friction or Peierl’s stress as well as due to small dislocation pinning
                    points that can be bypassed with the aid of thermal fluctuations. The (low)
                    temperature–(high) strain-rate dependence of
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> in bcc metals and alloys
                    is attributed to the low mobility of screw dislocations which experience a high
                    resistance to slip <ref target="#BIB7">[7]</ref>. The mechanism
                    of screw dislocation slip is the nucleation of a kink pair; the kink segments
                    move easily under an applied stress due to their edge character <ref target="#BIB7">[7]</ref>. The thermally activated nucleation of kink
                    pairs is very sensitive to temperature and stress. Thus high strain rates
                    require correspondingly high stress and/or temperature. At a sufficiently high
                    temperature, double kink nucleation is so rapid that the lattice friction
                    contribution to <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> is
                    negligible. However, thermally activated dispersed barrier strengthening by
                    tetragonal interstitial solutes may persist at higher temperatures. The athermal
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">ya</hi> component is associated
                    with hardening by polycrystalline grain structure, dislocations and larger
                    pinning features. Note that <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">ya</hi>
                    varies weakly with temperature in proportion to the elastic modulus. The
                    development of post-yield dislocation structures results in a strain-hardening
                    component, <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi>. In fcc
                    crystals, this contribution is relatively athermal. However, for bcc single
                    crystals with low dislocation densities,
                            <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> also depends on
                        <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                            <ac>ε</ac>
                            <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula> and <hi rend="italic">T</hi>
                    <ref target="#BIB8">[8]</ref>, suggesting a general
                                form<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>fl</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                    <ac>ε</ac>
                                    <ac>̇</ac></a>,ε)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>yt</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                    <ac>ε</ac>
                                    <ac>̇</ac></a>)+σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>ya</rm></inf>+σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε</inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                    <ac>ε</ac>
                                    <ac>̇</ac></a>,ε).</math></formula></formula></display></p><div n="3.1"><head>Yield stress model</head><p>There is a trade-off between temperature (<hi rend="italic">T</hi>) and
                        strain rate (<formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>) in determining <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>yt</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a>)</math></formula>: higher <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula> produces higher
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> corresponding to
                        values at lower <hi rend="italic">T</hi> and <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>. This behavior can be most simply
                        represented in terms of a strain rate-compensated temperature
                            (<hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>), defined as <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a><inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>r</rm></inf>)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>), where<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>=T[1+C<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ln</rm>(<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                        <ac>ε</ac>
                                        <ac>̇</ac></a><inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>r</rm></inf>/<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                        <ac>ε</ac>
                                        <ac>̇</ac></a>)].</math></formula></formula></display>Here
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi> is the actual absolute temperature (K) for the
                        reference strain rate. <ref target="#FD2">Eq. (3)</ref> is
                        an approximation derived from dislocation dynamics theory,
                                    where<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                        <ac>ε</ac>
                                        <ac>̇</ac></a>∝<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>[−H<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>(T,σ)/RT]=<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>[−(H<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">*</sup>−V<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">*</sup>σ)/RT].</math></formula></formula></display>Here
                            <hi rend="italic">H</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>(<hi rend="italic">T</hi>,<hi rend="italic">σ</hi>)
                        is the activation enthalpy, <hi rend="italic">H</hi><hi rend="superscript">*</hi> is
                        the activation enthalpy at 0 stress, and
                            <hi rend="italic">V</hi><hi rend="superscript">*</hi> is the activation volume. The
                        value of
                            <hi rend="italic">H</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>(<hi rend="italic">T</hi>,<hi rend="italic">σ</hi>)
                        decreases with decreasing temperature and increasing stress, approaching 0
                        at 0 K as<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">H<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>=αRT<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">for</rm>T⩽T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c</rm></inf>,</math></formula></formula></display>where
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c</hi> is the temperature at which
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> goes to 0. For a
                        single mechanism, <hi rend="italic">C</hi> in <ref target="#FD2">Eq.
                            (3)</ref> is approximately 1/<hi rend="italic">α</hi>.
                        Empirically, <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> data at
                        different strain rates should overlap when plotted on a
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> scale. The
                        effectiveness of the <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> model
                        is illustrated in <ref target="#FIG1">Fig.
                            1</ref>. Taking the slowest
                        strain rate of <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">4×10<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−4</sup><rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">s</rm><sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−1</sup></math></formula> as the reference condition,
                        the <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> data at all three
                        strain rates are plotted against
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>, using a `best fit'
                        value for <hi rend="italic">C</hi>=0.03. Note that the temperature shifts
                        due to strain-rate differences are significant. For example, <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(2<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">s</rm><sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−1</sup></math></formula>, 20°C)≈<formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(4×10<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−4</sup><rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">s</rm><sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−1</sup></math></formula>,−27°C).</p><p>The <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> vs
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> data can then be fit
                        to an appropriate analytical expression (solid line) to provide a complete
                        description of <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a>)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)</math></formula>.
                        For a single underlying thermally activated mechanism an appropriate general
                        form is <ref target="#BIB9">[9]</ref><display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t</rm></inf>[1−(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>/T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c</rm></inf>)<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">1/g<inf>1</inf></sup>]<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">g<inf>2</inf></sup>+σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>a</rm></inf>(1−βT),</math></formula></formula></display>where
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">a</hi> are the thermal and
                        athermal yield stress contributions at 0 K,
                            <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">1</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">2</hi> depend on the assumed shape
                        of the activation barrier (typically
                            <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">1</hi>≈<hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">2</hi>,
                        ranging from about 1 to 2) and <hi rend="italic">β</hi> is the
                        temperature coefficient of the elastic modulus
                            ≈6×10<hi rend="superscript">−5</hi>. As noted above, both the
                        Peierl’s stress (low temperature) and strengthening by interstitial
                        solutes (higher temperature) contribute to
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi>. Thus, we have
                        modified <ref target="#FD1">Eq. (1)</ref> to account for
                        both processes (labeled 1 and 2) with different
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi>,
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">1</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">2</hi>. The two activated
                        contributions are combined based on a
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> weighting: as
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> approaches 0,
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi> approaches
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t12</hi>=<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t1</hi>+<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t2</hi>; as
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> approaches
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c2</hi>,
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi> approaches
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">t2</hi>. In contrast to a
                        simple summation, this formulation provides a smooth interpolation and the
                        proper curvature in
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>(<hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>)
                        assuming <hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">1</hi>≈<hi rend="italic">g</hi><hi rend="subscript">2</hi>≈1. Thus,<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)=[σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t12</rm></inf>−(σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t12</rm></inf>−σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t2</rm></inf>)T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>/T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c2</rm></inf>][1−T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>/{T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c1</rm></inf>+(T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c2</rm></inf>−T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c1</rm></inf>)T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>/T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c2</rm></inf>}]+σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>a</rm></inf>(1−6×10<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">−5</sup>T).</math></formula></formula></display></p><p>The best fit results are shown as the solid curve in <ref target="#FIG1">Fig. 1</ref> for: <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t1</rm></inf>=885<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>;σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t2</rm></inf>=125<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>;T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c1</rm></inf>=170<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">K</rm></math></formula> and <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">T<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>c2</rm></inf>=500<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">K</rm>;σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>a</rm></inf>=245<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>;</math></formula> taking a typical value of
                            <hi rend="italic">H</hi>(<hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c</hi>)≈96 kJ/mole (≈1 eV), the average of
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c1</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="subscript">c2</hi> (335 K) is consistent with
                        an average <hi rend="italic">C</hi>≈0.03. While the physical significance of the fit parameters
                        should not be overemphasized, they can be broadly interpreted as crudely
                        characterizing the two underlying activated mechanisms' slip in this alloy.
                        The first would generally be similar in other vanadium alloys, while the
                        second would vary with the free interstitial impurity content.</p><p>Using these values and neglecting the small effect of
                            <hi rend="italic">β</hi>, <ref target="#FD3">Eq.
                            (7)</ref> can be rearranged to the convenient analytical
                                form<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)=1130−1.52T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′2</sup>+{(1.52T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′2</sup>−885T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)/(170+0.66T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)}(<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>).</math></formula></formula></display></p></div><div n="3.2"><head>Strain hardening</head><p>The post-yield strain-hardening contribution was experimentally defined
                        for plastic strain levels of 0.5 to 5.0% in increments of 0.5% and from 5.0%
                        to 14.0% in increments of 1.0%
                                    as<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε</inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>,ε)=σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>fl</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>,ε)−σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>(T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>).</math></formula></formula></display></p><p><ref target="#FIG2">Fig. 2</ref>
                        shows
                                <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi>(<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>,<hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>)
                        vs <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> for the representative
                        values of strain. The solid fit lines show slopes that are approximately
                        zero (low <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>), slightly positive (intermediate
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>) and somewhat more negative (higher
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>). However, on average, the slopes are
                        approximately zero and have significant correlation coefficients only at the
                        highest strains. The dependence of
                                <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> on
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> is much more significant and systematic
                        than on <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>. Thus, for a good
                        approximation, <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> can
                        be assumed to be athermal. The fcc-like <hi rend="italic">athermal</hi>
                        behavior of <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> of the
                        V–4Cr–4Ti alloy is probably due to a high dislocation density
                        and polycrystalline structure. The corresponding
                                <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi>(<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>)
                        averaged over <hi rend="italic">T</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi> for the 19
                        strain levels is shown in <ref target="#FIG3">Fig.
                            3</ref>. Two regimes are
                        observed above and below an <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> of about 0.025.
                        The <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> vs
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> data were fit to a modified Voce-type
                        equation <ref target="#BIB10">[10]</ref>. The Voce equation
                        has a power law (usually linear) regime at low strains, decreasing to a
                        constant saturation flow stress at higher strains. The results shown in
                            <ref target="#FIG3">Fig. 3</ref> can be represented by
                        two linear Voce-type terms with the form<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε</inf>ε=χ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε1</inf>ε[1−<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>(−ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>s1</rm></inf>/ε)]+χ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε2</inf>(ε−ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">t</inf>⩾0)[1−<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>(−ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>s2</rm></inf>/ε)].</math></formula></formula></display>Here
                                <hi rend="italic">χ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi><hi rend="subscript">1</hi>
                        and
                            <hi rend="italic">χ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi><hi rend="subscript">2</hi>
                        represent the magnitude of each strain-hardening term,
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">s1</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">s2</hi> characterize the
                        saturation strains and <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">t</hi> is
                        the threshold strain for the second mechanism (note
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>−0.025 in the second term is set
                        to 0 for <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>&lt;0.025). The solid line is the best fit given by the
                        expression for: <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">χ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε1</inf>=865;χ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">ε2</inf>=1130<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>;ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>s1</rm></inf>=0.07;ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>s2</rm></inf>=0.24;<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">and</rm>ε<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>t</rm></inf>=0.025</math></formula>. Note, other
                        approximate forms could be used, such as a linear term for
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> between yield and 0.025 and a simple
                        power law (≈400(<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>−0.025)<hi rend="superscript">0.45</hi>) for
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi>&gt;0.025.</p><p><ref target="#FD2 #FD4 #FD5">Eqs. (3), (8) and
                            (10)</ref> define an overall constitutive
                                    model,<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>fl</rm></inf>(T,<a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                        <ac>ε</ac>
                                        <ac>̇</ac></a>,ε)=1130−1.52T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>+{(1.52T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′2</sup>−885T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)/(170+0.66T<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">′</sup>)}+865ε[1−<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>(−0.07/ε)]+1130(ε−0.025)[1−<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">exp</rm>(−0.24/ε)](<rm xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">MPa</rm>).</math></formula></formula></display></p><p>The predicted vs measured
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi> at
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8 and 14% are shown in
                            <ref target="#FIG4">Fig. 4</ref>. The overall standard deviation of the predicted vs
                        measured <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi> is 16.4 MPa. The
                        model can be applied over the combined <hi rend="italic">T</hi> and <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                                <ac>ε</ac>
                                <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula> ranges up to 100°C and 2/s,
                        respectively. While some extrapolation beyond the experimental database may
                        be reasonable, there are also limits imposed by the uniform strain regime up
                        to about 0.14±0.04.</p><p>The constitutive model can also be used to estimate the uniform
                        strains, <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi>, in tensile tests
                        based on the simple instability criteria that
                            d<hi rend="italic">P</hi>/d<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>⩽0, where <hi rend="italic">P</hi>
                        is the load equal to <hi rend="italic">Aσ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>
                        where <hi rend="italic">A</hi> is the instantaneous specimen cross-section.
                        In the standard power law representation
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>/<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>=(<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>/<hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>)<hi rend="italic"><hi rend="superscript">n</hi></hi>,
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi>≈<hi rend="italic">n</hi>. However, in the
                        case where
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi>=<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>+<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript"><hi rend="italic">ε</hi></hi>(<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>),
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi> depends on
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> as well as the
                        strain-hardening behavior. If
                            <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> is represented
                        in terms of a simple power law strain hardening
                                k<hi rend="italic">ε<hi rend="superscript">n</hi></hi>,
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi> (at
                            d<hi rend="italic">P</hi>/d<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>=0) can be
                        found by solving the implicit relation<display><formula><formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">ε<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">n−1</sup>=[σ<inf xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><rm>y</rm></inf>/k+ε<sup xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">n</sup>]/n.</math></formula></formula></display></p><p><ref target="#FIG5">Fig. 5</ref>
                        compares experimentally measured values to
                        predictions of
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi>(<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>)
                        from <ref target="#FD6">Eq. (13)</ref> for <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">n=0.45,k=400</math></formula> MPa, adjusting
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> for the low-strain
                        regime as
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi>=<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>−0.25
                        and
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="superscript">′</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>=<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>+<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript"><hi rend="italic">ε</hi></hi>(0.025).
                        The data are in reasonable agreement with the model predictions including
                        the trend of <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi> decreasing
                        with increasing <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>. Note,
                        however, that the lowest values of
                            <hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">u</hi> are for high-rate
                        tests that may include effects of adiabatic heating that are not included in
                        the model.</p></div></div>
            <div n="4"><head>Conclusions</head><p>The <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">fl</hi> for the program heat
                    of V–4Cr–4Ti alloy has a classical low-temperature activated
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> regime and athermal
                    contributions to both <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi>. The
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">yt</hi> can be represented in
                    terms of a strain rate-compensated temperature dependence that includes
                    contributions from both Peierl’s stress and interstitial impurities. The
                    athermal post-yield <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> can
                    be described by a two-component Voce-typehardening law. The model, which
                    incorporates analytical expressions for these processes fit to the tensile
                    database, is broadly consistent with the current understanding of deformation in
                    bcc alloys.</p><p>The relatively simple and compact form of the constitutive models has also
                    a number of practical advantages. For example, it can be used to directly
                    estimate uniform strains, as described in the previous section. In addition, FEM
                    simulations of crack tip stress–strain fields are very sensitive to the
                    strain-hardening behavior. If the behavior of the V–4Cr–4Ti alloy
                    were cast in a standard Ramberg–Osgood form
                        [<hi rend="italic">ε</hi>/<hi rend="italic">ε</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>≈(<hi rend="italic">σ</hi>/<hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>)<hi rend="superscript">1/<hi rend="italic">n</hi></hi>],
                    the corresponding strain-hardening exponent (<hi rend="italic">n</hi>) would
                    appear to be a strong function of <hi rend="italic">T</hi> and <formula notation="XMLLatex"><math xmlns="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><a xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
                            <ac>ε</ac>
                            <ac>̇</ac></a></math></formula>, since <hi rend="italic">n</hi> implicitly
                    depends on <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>. For
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi> ranging from 250 to 800
                    MPa, the corresponding <hi rend="italic">n</hi> varies from about 0.13 to 0.06.
                    However, when cast in proper non-dimensional form, the predicted FEM fields are
                    very similar over a wide range of temperatures and strain rates since: (a)
                            <hi rend="italic">σ<hi rend="subscript">ε</hi></hi> is athermal and
                    approximately the same for various conditions; and (b) the non-dimensional
                    fields depend only weakly on
                        <hi rend="italic">σ</hi><hi rend="subscript">y</hi>/<hi rend="italic">E</hi>,
                    where <hi rend="italic">E</hi> is the elastic modulus.</p><p>Since this investigation focused on a specific vanadium alloy condition,
                    the results cannot be directly interpreted in terms of the underlying
                    microstructure and alloy chemistry. Developing such microstructurally based
                    constitutive models, including the effects of irradiation and key phenomena such
                    as flow localization, is an important objective of future research.</p></div>
        </div><div>
            <head>Acknowledgements</head>
            <p>The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of J.W. Sheckherd, D. Gragg
                and D. Klingensmith as well as that of our collaborators, Arthur Rowcliffe and his
                colleagues at ORNL. The work was supported by the US Department of Energy Grant #
                DE-FG03-87ER-52143.</p>
        </div></body><back><div type="references"><head>References</head><listBibl>
                <bibl xml:id="BIB1" n="[1]">
                        H.M. Chung, H.-C. Tsai, D.L. Smith, R. Peterson, C. Curtis, C.
                            Wojcik, R. Kinney, DOE/ER-0313/17, US Department of Energy,
                            1994
                    </bibl>
                <bibl xml:id="BIB2" n="[2]">
                        M.L. Grossbeck, D.J. Alexander, J.J. Henry, W.S. Eatherly, L.T.
                            Gibson, DOE/ER-0313/18, US Department of Energy, 1995
                    </bibl>
                <bibl xml:id="BIB3" n="[3]">
                        A.N. Gubbi, A.F. Rowcliffe, W.S. Eatherly, DOE/ER-0313/18, US
                            Department of Energy, 1995
                    </bibl>
                <bibl xml:id="BIB4" n="[4]">
                        A.F. Rowcliffe, D.T. Hoelzer, S.J. Zinkle, DOE/ER-0313/26 US
                            Department of Energy, 1999
                    </bibl>
                <bibl xml:id="BIB5" n="[5]">
                        G.R. Odette, E. Donahue, G.E. Lucas, J.W. Sheckherd,
                            DOE/ER-0313/20, US Department of Energy, 1996, p. 11
                    </bibl>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB6" n="[6]"><analytic><sb:authors xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">F.J.</forename>
                                    <surname>Zerilli</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">R.W.</forename>
                                    <surname>Armstrong</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                            </sb:authors></analytic><monogr><sb:maintitle xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">J. Appl. Phys.</sb:maintitle><imprint><biblScope unit="vol">61</biblScope><sb:date xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">1987</sb:date><biblScope unit="page" from="1816">1816</biblScope></imprint></monogr></biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB7" n="[7]"><analytic><sb:authors xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">J.P.</forename>
                                    <surname>Hirth</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">J.</forename>
                                    <surname>Lothe</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                            </sb:authors></analytic><monogr><imprint/></monogr></biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB8" n="[8]"><analytic><sb:authors xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">M.</forename>
                                    <surname>Tang</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">B.</forename>
                                    <surname>Devincre</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">L.P.</forename>
                                    <surname>Kubin</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                            </sb:authors></analytic><monogr><sb:maintitle xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">Model. Simulation Mater. Sci.
                                            Eng.</sb:maintitle><imprint><biblScope unit="vol">7</biblScope><sb:date xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">1999</sb:date><biblScope unit="page" from="893">893</biblScope></imprint></monogr></biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB9" n="[9]"><analytic><sb:authors xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">P.</forename>
                                    <surname>Spätig</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">G.R.</forename>
                                    <surname>Odette</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">G.E.</forename>
                                    <surname>Lucas</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                            </sb:authors></analytic><monogr><sb:maintitle xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">J. Nucl. Mater.</sb:maintitle><imprint><biblScope unit="vol">275</biblScope><sb:date xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">1999</sb:date><biblScope unit="page" from="324">324</biblScope></imprint></monogr></biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB10" n="[10]"><analytic><sb:authors xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">
                                <sb:author>
                                    <forename type="first">E.</forename>
                                    <surname>Voce</surname>
                                </sb:author>
                            </sb:authors></analytic><monogr><sb:maintitle xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">J. Inst. Met.</sb:maintitle><imprint><biblScope unit="vol">74</biblScope><sb:date xmlns:sb="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/struct-bib/dtd">1968</sb:date><biblScope unit="page" from="537">537</biblScope></imprint></monogr></biblStruct>
            </listBibl></div></back></text></TEI>