<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="en" type="article">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">English‐medium instruction at a university in Macau: Policy and realities</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Blackwell Publishing Ltd</publisher>
            <availability>
               <licence>Copyright © 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd© 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd</licence>
            </availability>
            <date type="published" when="2013-12"/>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct>
               <analytic>
                  <title level="a" type="main">English‐medium instruction at a university in Macau: Policy and realities</title>
                  <title level="a" type="short">English‐medium instruction at a university in Macau: Policy and realities</title>
                  <author xml:id="author-0000">
                    <persName>
                        <forename type="first">WERNER</forename>
                        <surname>BOTHA</surname>
                    </persName>
                    <email>wrbotha@gmail.com</email>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName>Macau University of Science and Technology</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <street>Department of General Education</street>
                           <settlement type="city">Avenida Wai Long, Taipa</settlement>
                           <region>Macau</region>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <idno type="DOI">10.1111/weng.12053</idno>
                  <idno type="article-ID">WENG12053</idno>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">World EnglishesWorld Englishes</title>
                  <title level="j" type="alt">WORLD ENGLISHES</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0883-2919</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1467-971X</idno>
                  <idno type="book-DOI">10.1111/(ISSN)1467-971X</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">32</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="461">461</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="475">475</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="count-page">15</biblScope>
                     <date type="published" when="2013-12"/>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
      <encodingDesc>
         <classDecl>
            <taxonomy>
               <category>
                  <catDesc>componentType</catDesc>
                  <category>
                     <catDesc>article</catDesc>
                  </category>
               </category>
            </taxonomy>
         </classDecl>
      </encodingDesc>
      <profileDesc>
         <abstract>
                    <p>ABSTRACT</p>
                    <p>This paper discusses the sociolinguistic background to the use of English in higher education in Macau by presenting the results of a sociolinguistic survey on the use of
                        English in a privately‐owned university in the special administrative region of Macau. A survey of language use and attitudes was administered to 26 teaching staff and 227
                        undergraduate students at the university in mid‐2012. The results report on the status and functions of English at the university, as well as attitudes and ideologies. However,
                        they also point to a gap between the stated policy of the institution and the realities of language use at the university, and also provide insights into the ways in which
                        English is used outside the formal curriculum.<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-note-0001"/>
               <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-note-0001"/>
            </p>
                </abstract>
      </profileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0010" type="section">
            <head>INTRODUCTION</head>
            <p>Over the last decade or so, an unprecedented number of students from mainland China have migrated abroad to pursue higher education qualifications, with many of these students attracted
                to English‐medium higher education (Li and Bray <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>; Skyrme <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0028"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0028"/>; Gao <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0013"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0013"/>). Many mainland
                Chinese students are also motivated to further their education in Macau or Hong Kong, as these students possibly view the two territories as being ‘both domestic and external, and [the
                universities] as Chinese institutions with international standards and global linkages (Li and Bray <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>: 792). It could be assumed that the major
                universities in these two territories have benefited from the recruitment of mainland Chinese students, especially since these institutions present themselves as English‐medium
                universities. Li and Bray (<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>: 791) point out that higher education in Macau (and Hong Kong) ‘plays a dual role, as a destination in itself for higher
                education and as a stepping‐stone for students’ further international development.’ Despite the growing number of cross‐border students from mainland China studying in Macau and Hong
                Kong, many of these students often have difficulties in adapting to the linguistic challenges of learning through the medium of English, especially since most of these students are
                used to learning through the medium of Putonghua and do not have the necessary experience or language proficiency in English to benefit from English‐medium instruction (Gao <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0013"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0013"/>; see also Hu and Alsagoff <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0017"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0017"/>).</p>
            <p>The Special Administrative Region of Macau (hereafter Macau) presents a specific instance of the kind of problems that language policy makers in higher education institutions are facing
                in the territory.<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-note-0002"/>
               <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-note-0002"/> Macau has a long and unusual history in China, as the territory or ‘enclave’ was governed and administered by the Portuguese from
                the 1560s until 1999. The territory comprises a very small land area of only 29.5 square kilometers and is home to a population of 552,500 people (DSEC <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>) – an average of 18,728 people per square kilometer. Its sovereignty formally reverted to the People's Republic of China only in 1999, two years after the much‐publicized ‘handover’
                of Hong Kong to the Chinese government. Macau is also one of the two Special Administrative Regions (SARs) belonging to the People's Republic of China (the other SAR being Hong Kong).
                The region is located on the western side of the Pearl River Delta, and borders Guangdong Province to the north and faces the South China Sea to the east and south. The territory
                currently is noted for its tourism and gambling industry. Interestingly, the English language has a very long history in Macau with contact between English traders recorded as early as
                1637 (Bolton <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0003"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0003"/>: 126).</p>
            <p>According to the Basic Law of Macau, which provides the mini‐constitution of the enclave after 1999, Chinese and Portuguese are specified as the official languages of the territory
                (Chinese Government <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0010"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0010"/>). Even though Chinese and Portuguese are the two official languages of Macau, English maintains a ‘de facto additional working
                language status’ in the territory, particularly in the domain of education, despite the fact that there are no official policies guiding the use of English stipulated by the Government
                of Macau (Moody <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0027"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0027"/>: 6). The influence of English in education can be seen throughout secondary and higher education, with 13.4 per cent of Macau
                students enrolled in schools that use English as a medium of instruction (Moody <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0027"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0027"/>).</p>
            <p>What is notable about higher education in Macau is that of the 10 institutions of higher education in the territory, only two of these currently admit students from mainland China in
                significant numbers. What is also noteworthy in Macau higher education is that a number of the colleges and universities in the territory brand themselves as internationally‐oriented
                institutions, where either English is used as an official teaching medium, or is an important additional language for educational purposes. This is the case at the most prestigious
                university, the University of Macau and is certainly true of the privately‐owned university (Macau University of Science and Technology) where this study was carried out, which
                henceforth is referred to as MUST. This university is the newest of the higher education institutions in Macau, and was founded in 2000. As already mentioned, it is privately‐owned and
                predominantly relies on student fees for its income. To some extent, it has benefited from the demand for English‐medium education from the mainland, and until 2012, drew a majority of
                its students from the People's Republic of China. Li and Bray (<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>: 804) point out that the Macau government has never really had ‘a strong tradition of
                sponsorship of mainland Chinese students; and in any case the private MUST saw mainland China as a market to be exploited rather than a society to be supported.’ Recently, however, the
                university revised its admissions policy, and now takes 52 per cent of its students from Macau, and around 48 per cent from mainland China. MUST has evidently benefited financially
                from the recruitment of students from the mainland, at a time when colleges and universities in the territory have striven to promote Macau as an educational hub for mainland Chinese
                students (Li and Bray <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0022"/>). This study was carried out by a researcher then employed as a lecturer at MUST, in order to investigate the use of the
                English language by teachers and students within the university, as well as outside the curriculum in the personal lives of those teaching and studying within the institution.</p>
         </div>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0020" type="section">
            <head>THE SOCIOLINGUISTIC CONTEXT</head>
            <p>One important source of information on Macau society is the government census, which, in recent years, has included information on language issues, including the percentage of those
                claiming a particular language as a ‘usual language,’ and those claiming the ‘ability’ to speak various languages (including languages and dialects spoken as a second language, or of
                perceived secondary importance). According to the DSEC (<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>) the ‘usual language’ of the respondents refers to ‘the language an individual mostly used at
                home’. From the 2011 census, Cantonese is the ‘usual language’ of 83.3 per cent of the population (DSEC <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>). Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>
               <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>
                presents the usual languages for Macau, where it can be seen that Cantonese is the dominant language in the territory.</p>
            <figure type="table" xml:id="weng12053-tbl-0001">
               <head>2011 Census results for languages/dialects in Macau</head>
               <table cols="4">
                    <row role="label">
                     <cell cols="1">Languages/dialects</cell>
                     <cell style="align(left)" cols="2">As a ‘usual language’ (%)</cell>
                     <cell style="align(left)" cols="3">As a ‘second’ language (%)</cell>
                     <cell style="align(left)" cols="4">Total (%)</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Cantonese</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">83.3</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">6.7</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">90.0</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Mandarin (Putonghua)</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">5.0</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">36.4</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">41.4</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Hokkien</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">3.7</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">3.2</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">6.9</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Other Chinese dialects</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">2.0</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">6.8</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">8.8</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Portuguese</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">0.7</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">1.7</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">2.4</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">English</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">2.3</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">18.8</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">21.1</cell>
                  </row>
                  <row>
                     <cell cols="1">Others</cell>
                     <cell cols="2">1.7</cell>
                     <cell cols="3">5.5</cell>
                     <cell cols="4">7.2</cell>
                  </row>
                </table>
               <note xml:id="weng12053-tbl1-note-0001">
                        <p>(DSEC <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>
                     <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0024"/>) <hi rend="italic">N = 552,503</hi>
                  </p>
                    </note>
            </figure>
            <p>From the Macao Special Administrative Region Statistics and Census Service data cited in Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>
               <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0001"/>, it would appear that the linguistic environment in
                Macau is dominated by Cantonese, with only small numbers of citizens claiming to use other languages, such as Putonghua and English, as a ‘usual language’. In Macau, however, there are
                two designated co‐official languages, ‘Chinese’ (undefined, as a general designation) and Portuguese, which is very much a minority language in usage mainly in government and the law
                courts. Despite the figures for the usual languages, however, increasing numbers of citizens do claim a knowledge of Putonghua and English as ‘second’ or other languages in their
                repertoires, thus resulting in a total of some 41 per cent claiming a knowledge of Mandarin (Putonghua) and around 21 per cent claiming a knowledge of English.</p>
            <p>MUST is the newest of 10 tertiary institutions in Macau SAR, with an undergraduate student population of some 9,000 students. The university consists of eight primary academic
                divisions, five of which have English‐medium instruction degrees, programs, and courses. In the university handbook, in terms of language policy, all the academic divisions claim to
                use some form of dual Chinese‐English medium teaching. A large portion of the student population is recruited from mainland China, as this forms part of the university's long term
                recruitment strategy (Young <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0032"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0032"/>). The university has promoted English‐medium instruction in terms of internationalism and by creating an impression of
                global competitiveness. For example, a message on one of its websites notes ‘We intend to provide students an internationalized learning place to polish the communication ability by
                offering all English lectured courses in junior and senior stages’, and elsewhere that ‘[in] the entire English teaching, under the raise internationalization field of vision, [faculty
                of management and administration] students can integrate rapidly into the international competition environment’ [sic]. One interesting fact about the recruitment of mainland Chinese
                students is that the university does not require an international English proficiency test score as part of the student admission process. Instead, students from the China mainland are
                grouped according to their English results in their Chinese University Entrance (or <hi rend="italic">gaokao</hi>) examinations. Local Macau students or students from the mainland who have not taken
                the <hi rend="italic">gaokao</hi> examinations are required to take the university's own English proficiency examination. As English medium instruction is promoted by the university in terms of
                internationalism and global competitiveness, one might wonder whether this is consonant with the linguistic realities that stakeholders in English medium instruction programs face on
                campus. The specific research issues that were specified before the survey was carried out were as follows: <list xml:id="weng12053-list-0001" style="bulleted">
                    <item n=""/>
                    <item n=""/>
                    <item n=""/>
                    <item n=""/>
                </list>
            </p>
            <p>In addition, the project also aimed to probe the reception of English medium education among students at MUST. In particular, it was hoped that the qualitative interviews which were
                part of the data collection would help shed light on what has been called ‘the linguistic worlds’ of Chinese students coming from rapidly‐changing multilingual backgrounds (Bolton
                    <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>; <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0005"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0005"/>).</p>
         </div>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0030" type="section">
            <head>THE RESEARCH DESIGN</head>
            <p>As noted earlier, the use of English at Chinese universities, including universities in Macau, has increased dramatically during recent years. Despite this, very few sociolinguistic
                studies have been carried out which explicitly investigate how ordinary Chinese students engage with English on a day to day basis, as well as how their beliefs about languages are
                being shaped by the rhetoric of English as an international language, and indeed the ideology of internationalism and modernity itself. Generally, research on the use of English at
                Chinese universities have remained focused on attitudes of Chinese learners towards various English varieties (e.g. Kirkpatrick and Xu <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0021"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0021"/>; Gao et al.
                    <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0014"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0014"/>; Hu <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0018"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0018"/>; <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0019"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0019"/>; Young <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0032"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0032"/>; Fong <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0012"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0012"/>; He and Li <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0015"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0015"/>; Evans <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0011"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0011"/>), and this study aims to provide what appears to be much needed
                sociolinguistic data on the actual use of English at Chinese universities (Bolton <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>, Bolton and Graddol <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0006"/>
               <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0006"/>)</p>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0040" type="section">
               <head>Data collection and sample description</head>
               <p>The research used an eclectic sociolinguistic approach with various methods being utilized for data collection. The primary research method was a sociolinguistic questionnaire which
                    was given to a sample universe consisting of teaching staff and undergraduate students. This questionnaire was adapted from a survey designed by Bacon‐Shone et al. (<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0001"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0001"/>), which was utilized in amended form by Bolton and Kuteeva (<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0007"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0007"/>), with the latter assessing the use of English for
                    academic purposes at Stockholm University. This questionnaire was first translated into Chinese in order to create a bilingual version of the questionnaire. The bilingual version
                    allowed all the participants to optimize their chances for fully understanding the text of each question.</p>
               <p>A total of 22 lecturers and 222 students were surveyed using questionnaires and the student sample was controlled for FACULTY, YEAR OF STUDY, and GENDER, while the teaching staff
                    sample was controlled for FACULTY. The student sample consisted of 107 (48%) male and 115 (52%) female students. As for year of study, the sample consisted of 57 (25.6%) first
                    year, 55 (24.7%) second year, 55 (24.7%) third year, and 55 (24.7%) fourth year students. In terms of faculty, 46 (20.7%) students from the faculty of management and
                    administration, 43 (19.3%) from the faculty of hospitality and tourism, 44 (19.8%) from the faculty of law, 44 (19.8%) from the faculty of information technology, and 45 (20.2%)
                    students from the faculty of humanities and arts took part in the survey. The teaching staff sample consisted of 16 (72.7%) mainland lecturers, and 6 (27.2%) lecturers from Macau,
                    Hong Kong, and Taiwan. Also in this sample were 10 (45.4%) males and 12 (54.5%) females. Further to this, nine randomly selected students and teaching staff (2 males, and 7
                    females) were interviewed as a follow‐up to the questionnaires. And finally, note‐taking and class/lesson observations were conducted to further assess the linguistic environments
                    of teaching staff and students on campus.</p>
               <p>In the planning stage of the survey, it was decided that the main focus of this study would be on the patterns of language use and language attitudes among mainland Chinese students
                    studying at MUST, many of whom had been evidently attracted to the institution because of its international branding and the use of English within the university. A second reason
                    for the focus on mainland students was that this study is intended as an initial study in a wider research project which will investigate English‐medium programs at mainland
                    Chinese universities. As a result, Macau students were deliberately underrepresented in the survey, with 87 per cent (193) of the undergraduates in the mainland category, and only
                    13 per cent (29) local Macau students. This compared with a general profile in the undergraduate body at the time of approximately 70 per cent mainland and 30 per cent Macau
                    students. Therefore in the results that follow for students, the major emphasis is on the use of languages by mainland students in Macau, although, a number of qualitative
                    interviews with Macau students were carried out, and are reported on below. Finally, a limitation of this study concerns the nature of the survey data generated by self‐report, as
                    this may project respondents’ beliefs rather than accurate linguistic behavior (see Briggs <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0009"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0009"/>; Judd et al. <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0020"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0020"/>).
                    Bearing these considerations in mind, this paper proceeds to report on some of the most important findings of the research.</p>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0050" type="section">
            <head>THE FINDINGS</head>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0060" type="section">
               <head>The use of English and other languages on the MUST campus</head>
               <p>A number of questions were asked of students concerning the use of English in various educational, as well as extra‐curricular settings. Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                    presents the use of English by undergraduate students in educational settings. As can be seen from panel a, frequency of exposure to English in their lectures varies according to
                    field of study (faculty). The greatest exposure to English was found to occur in the faculty of hospitality and tourism, where 67.4 per cent of students reported that either ‘all’
                    or ‘almost all’ of their lectures were presented in English. It would also appear that students in the faculty of management and administration, as well the faculty of information
                    technology receive a large amount of their lecture content in English, with 60.8 per cent and 43.1 per cent of students in these faculties respectively claiming to hear English in
                    their lectures most or all of the time.</p>
               <figure type="table" xml:id="weng12053-tbl-0002">
                  <head>Students’ exposure to and the use of English in educational settings</head>
                  <table cols="4">
                        <row role="label">
                        <cell cols="1">Faculty</cell>
                        <cell style="align(center)" cols="2">All/almost all</cell>
                        <cell style="align(center)" cols="3">About half</cell>
                        <cell style="align(center)" cols="4">Almost none/none</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">a Students’ responses on lectures in English (by no. of students per faculty)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Management and Administration</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">60.8% (28)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">28.2% (13)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">8.6% (4)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Hospitality and Tourism</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">67.4% (29)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">23.2% (10)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">11.6% (5)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Law</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">15.9% (7)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">27.2% (12)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">54.5% (24)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Information Technology</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">43.1% (19)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">47.7% (21)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">6.8% (3)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Humanities and Arts</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">22.2% (10)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">37.7% (17)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">42.2% (19)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">b Students’ responses on proportion of language use on campus (for English, Putonghua, and Cantonese)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">English</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">13.4% (29)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">46.5% (100)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">40% (86)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Putonghua</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">87.2% (191)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">7.3% (16)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">5.4% (12)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Cantonese</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">31.0% (67)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">22.6% (49)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">45.3% (98)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">c Students’ responses on proportion of languages heard in lectures (for English, Putonghua, and
                                        Cantonese)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">English</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">43.3% (94)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">35.9% (78)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">20.7% (45)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Putonghua</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">70.9% (154)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">20.2% (44)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">8.7% (19)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Cantonese</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">23.9% (51)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">34.2% (73)</cell>
                        <cell cols="4">41.7% (89)</cell>
                     </row>
                    </table>
               </figure>
               <p>It was also found that the use of English was strongly promoted in the faculties of hospitality and tourism, management and administration, and information technology. This is
                    evident in the amount of English reading that is prescribed within these three faculties, with 68.8 per cent of management and administration students reporting that most or all of
                    their required reading was in English. This is followed by 65 per cent of hospitality and tourism and 54.5 per cent of information technology students claiming that ‘all’ or
                    ‘almost all’ of their required reading was in English. However, even these students at the university actually did less reading in English than was required by their faculties with
                    many preferring to buy and read Chinese editions of their course books instead of reading the prescribed English versions. In fact, in the top three faculties that promote and use
                    English, just 55.4 per cent of the management and administration students and 59 per cent of hospitality and tourism students reported reading most or all of their prescribed
                    reading material in English. Similarly, only 34 per cent of information technology students reported that they actually did all or most of their prescribed reading in English,
                    which shows the biggest gap between prescribed and actual reading in these three faculties.</p>
               <p>Even less exposure to English lectures was reported for the faculty of humanities and arts with 22.2 per cent, and the faculty of law with 15.9 per cent. These low figures are also
                    supported by the fact that students in these faculties are very rarely required to do their course reading in English. It was found that 22.2 per cent of the humanities and arts
                    students and 16.2 per cent of the law students were required to do most or all of their course reading in English. Considering this, it is not surprising that only 8.8 per cent of
                    the humanities and arts students actually did most or all of required course reading in English. These low levels of reported English exposure in these faculties can be explained
                    by the fact that many of the subjects or programs in these faculties require students to be proficient in Chinese. For example in the law faculty legal studies (especially at
                    undergraduate level) focus almost exclusively on mainland Chinese law. Only two subjects in this faculty are taught through the medium of English, ‘WTO law’, and ‘international
                    law’.</p>
               <p>From panel b in Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/> it can be seen how undergraduate students reported on the proportion of their use of English, Putonghua, and Cantonese, on
                    campus. Very significantly, from these results, it can be seen that (in disjuncture with the official policy of the university<ref type="note" target="#weng12053-note-0003"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-note-0003"/>), the most‐widely
                    used language on the MUST campus is Putonghua, with 87.2 per cent of students reporting to use Putonghua ‘all’ or ‘almost all’ the time. Interestingly, however, 46.5 per cent of
                    students also responded that they used English ‘about half’ the time on campus. In addition, 40 per cent of students said that they ‘almost never’ or ‘never’ use English, which is
                    slightly lower than the percentage of students who stated they ‘never’ or ‘almost never’ use Cantonese on campus. This dominant use of Putonghua on campus could be explained with
                    reference to the educational history of mainland students before coming to Macau. As 83 per cent (183) of the surveyed students attended high schools where Putonghua was used as a
                    medium of instruction, compared with 17 per cent of students who studied through the medium of Cantonese (either in Macau or Hong Kong), it is evident that the majority of students
                    had a high level of competence in Putonghua, and were used to hearing Putonghua in educational settings. The survey also revealed that the students reported coming from homes where
                    a total of 54 different Chinese languages and varieties were spoken, with only 36.5 per cent of the students reportedly speaking Putonghua as a first language. Thus, the vast
                    majority of mainland students were very accustomed to the use of Putonghua in the domain of education before beginning their studies at MUST.</p>
               <p>Students were also asked which proportions of their lectures were in English, Putonghua, and Cantonese respectively, presented in panel c in Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>. When compared with panel a, it seems there was a slight over‐reporting by students regarding that particular question, when they were asked to respond on the frequency of
                    English exposure in their lectures. In panel c, 43.3 per cent of students reported to hear English ‘all’ or ‘almost all’ of the time, while 70.9 per cent of students reportedly
                    heard Putonghua very frequently. As expected, Cantonese is reportedly the least frequently heard language in class, with 41 per cent of students reporting that they heard the
                    language ‘almost none’ or ‘none’ of the time. It would appear that the data in panel c portrays more accurately the ‘place’ of English in lectures at MUST. Even though the
                    university claims English as a medium of instruction, the reality is that English is generally much less frequently heard in class, compared with Putonghua (with perhaps the
                    exception of the faculty of management and administration and the faculty of hospitality and tourism). The relatively high proportion of reported English exposure in lectures by
                    students may reflect the attitudes to English on the MUST campus about the role of English as a global language.</p>
               <p>Figures <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/> and <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/> present the results of the attitudes of the surveyed students and lecturers toward the notion that
                    ‘MUST is more international if courses are taught in English’. In Figure <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0001"/>, 83.3 per cent (185) of the students ‘agree/strongly agree’ with the
                    notion that the university is more international if courses are conducted through the medium of English. Similarly, in Figure <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/>
                  <ref type="figure" target="#weng12053-fig-0002"/>, some 95% (21) of
                    the lecturers ‘agree/strongly agree’ with this notion. From these attitudinal responses it is evident that the vast majority of students and teachers perceive the notion of
                    ‘internationalism’ as an important factor in how they perhaps already view the university, and hence why they may have been attracted to the institution in the first place.</p>
               <figure xml:id="weng12053-fig-0001">
                  <p>
                     <media mimeType="image"
                            url="urn:x-wiley:08832919:media:weng12053:weng12053-fig-0001"/>
                  </p>
                  <figDesc>
                        Students’ attitudes to ‘English as an international language’.
                        Q58: MUST is more international if courses are conducted in English, N = 222
                    </figDesc>
               </figure>
               <figure xml:id="weng12053-fig-0002">
                  <p>
                     <media mimeType="image"
                            url="urn:x-wiley:08832919:media:weng12053:weng12053-fig-0002"/>
                  </p>
                  <figDesc>
                        Teaching staff attitudes to ‘English as an international language’
                        Q55: MUST is more international if courses are conducted in English, N = 22
                    </figDesc>
               </figure>
               <p>Several students and lecturers were interviewed regarding their opinions towards English as a medium of instruction at MUST, which revealed the prevailing perception that because
                    English is international, this internationalizes the university. The following are typical of responses to the question <hi rend="italic">Do you think English should be used as the medium of
                        instruction at this university?</hi>
                    <list xml:id="weng12053-list-0002" style="1">
                        <item n=""/>
                        <item n=""/>
                    </list>
               </p>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0070" type="section">
               <head>Extra‐curricular use of English</head>
               <p>A number of survey questions also focused on students’ and teachers’ extra‐curricular exposure to English. Generally, 38.1 per cent (84) of students reportedly used ‘little’ or ‘no’
                    English in their spare time, while 12.2 per cent (27) used ‘a lot’ of English for extra‐curricular purposes. One hundred and nine (49.5%) of the student respondents claimed to use
                    ‘some’ English. Results also indicate that the faculty of business and administration students use English in their spare time the most often with 26.6 per cent of these students
                    claiming to use ‘a lot’ of English. Surprisingly, the faculty of information technology students used English in their free time the least often with 51.1 per cent of these
                    respondents reportedly using ‘little’ or ‘no’ English for extra‐curricular purposes. In contrast to the student sample, 40.9 per cent of the teaching staff reportedly use English
                    ‘a lot’ in their spare time. None of the lecturers claimed to use ‘little’ or ‘no’ extra‐curricular use of English. Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/> represents the reported
                    extra‐curricular use of English by both students and lecturers. As can also be seen from the table the most frequently reported use of English outside of educational settings by
                    students is when they are ‘socializing with friends’, with 57.2 per cent reported to do so. It needs to be pointed out here that when the respondents claimed to use English when
                    socializing with their friends, that this referred most often to using isolated English words and expressions (e.g. ‘borrowing’ or ‘code‐switching’). The next highest proportion of
                    extra‐curricular use of English by students is with ‘reading’, at 49 per cent, closely followed by 47 per cent of students who reportedly use English for ‘online searches’, and
                    45.9 per cent who use English for ‘online socializing’. In comparison, with lecturers, the most frequently reported extra‐curricular use of English is with ‘reading’, at 63.6 per
                    cent. This is followed by 59 per cent of lecturers who reported to use English when ‘socializing with friends’, followed by 54.5 per cent for both ‘internet searches’ and
                    ‘travel’.</p>
               <figure type="table" xml:id="weng12053-tbl-0003">
                  <head>Reported extra‐curricular use of English by students and teaching staff</head>
                  <table cols="3">
                        <row role="label">
                        <cell cols="1">Extra‐curricular Activity</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">Students</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">Lecturers</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Socializing with friends</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">57.2% (127)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">59% (13)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Internet searches</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">47.7% (106)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">54.5% (12)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Online chats</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">28.3% (63)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">31.8% (7)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Blogging</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">11.7% (26)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">4.5% (1)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">PC Games/Video games</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">34.6% (77)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">4.5% (1)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Travel</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">35.5% (79)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">54.5% (12)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Online socializing</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">45.9% (102)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">22.7% (5)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Reading</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">49% (109)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">63.6% (14)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Clubs/hobbies</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">15.3% (34)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">27.2% (6)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Other</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">4% (9)</cell>
                        <cell style="align(center)" cols="3">0</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Never use English</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">3.1% (7)</cell>
                        <cell style="align(center)" cols="3">0</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1"/>
                        <cell cols="2">
                                        <hi rend="italic">N = 222</hi>
                                    </cell>
                        <cell cols="3">
                                        <hi rend="italic">N = 22</hi>
                                    </cell>
                     </row>
                    </table>
               </figure>
               <p>In particular, it was found that the faculty of hospitality and tourism and the faculty of management and administration students reported the highest proportion of extra‐curricular
                    use of English, with 75.5 per cent of the management and administration students and 70.4 per cent of hospitality and tourism students reporting ‘some’ or ‘a lot’ of English use in
                    their spare time. It is also interesting to note that in some faculties the use of English for extra‐curricular purposes seems related to their year of study. For instance, 61.9
                    per cent of the third and fourth year law students reported that they use ‘very little’ or ‘no’ English in their spare time. What was particularly surprising was that a similar
                    number of third and fourth year information technology students reported little or no English use in their free time, at 65 per cent. Year three and four management and
                    administration and hospitality and tourism students use English ‘some’ or ‘a lot’ for extra‐curricular purposes, at 50 per cent and 69.5 per cent respectively – the highest
                    reported use by third and fourth year students among the faculties. Also, with reference to the extra‐curricular use of English, it appears that students’ majors influence the
                    activities they reported. For instance, 51.1 per cent of hospitality and tourism students reported that they use English for ‘travel’, a much higher response rate for this activity
                    compared with students from any other faculty.</p>
               <p>One question asked students to state the purpose where they used English the last time, outside of a classroom setting, and the responses are presented in Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>. From this table, and compared with Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>, one may infer that students did not over‐report in their use of
                    English when socializing with 27.7 per cent responding that they last used English when communicating with friends. What also seems noteworthy is the fact that less than a third
                    (27.7%) of students reportedly last used English outside of a classroom setting for their studies, an equal amount with those claiming they last used English when ‘socializing’. It
                    also appears that quite a large number of students last read English in their extra‐curricular time, which generally supports the reported extra‐curricular use of English presented
                    in Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>.</p>
               <figure type="table" xml:id="weng12053-tbl-0004">
                  <head>Most recent extra‐curricular use of English reported by students</head>
                  <table cols="3">
                        <row role="label">
                        <cell cols="1">Reported Activity</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">(%)</cell>
                        <cell cols="3"/>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Improving English</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">3.1</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(6)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Socializing</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">27.7</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(53)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Writing emails</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">3.1</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(6)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Entertainment</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">9.9</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(19)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Giving directions</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">2</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(4)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Internet</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">5.7</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(11)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Reading</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">13.6</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(26)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Studying</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">27.7</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(53)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Travel</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">1.5</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(3)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Working</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">2.6</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(5)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Writing</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">1</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(2)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1">Online socializing</cell>
                        <cell cols="2">1.5</cell>
                        <cell cols="3">(3)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell cols="1"/>
                        <cell cols="2"/>
                        <cell cols="3">
                                        <hi rend="italic">N = 191</hi>
                                    </cell>
                     </row>
                    </table>
               </figure>
               <p>Students were also asked where they typically use English outside of class, and one student reported in her interview: <list xml:id="weng12053-list-0003" style="custom">
                        <item n="3."/>
                    </list>
               </p>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0080" type="section">
            <head>CONCLUSION</head>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0090" type="section">
               <head>The use of English by undergraduate students and educators at MUST</head>
               <p>The reality of English on the MUST campus is that the amount of English students and teaching staff engage with on campus is related to the respective faculties. There is a visibly
                    higher exposure to English in the faculty of management and administration and the faculty of hospitality and tourism compared with the other faculties. At the same time, even
                    though there is little engagement with English in some of the faculties, students across the university consider English important and many claim that the language has an
                    instrumental value for them. However, complete exposure to English across the university is not the norm. For instance, in typical English medium classes some 70 per cent of
                    students reported that all or most of their language exposure was to Putonghua (cf. Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>, panel c). In addition to this is the fact that 77 per
                    cent of the student respondents who have taken formal English proficiency tests took an English examination from mainland China (e.g. CET or TEM), with only 23 per cent of
                    respondents claiming to have taken an internationally recognized English proficiency test such as IELTS or TOEFL. The reality is also that, on campus, students typically use
                    Putonghua as a result of their competence in the language, and their need for an educational lingua franca. As one student pointed out in her interview: <list xml:id="weng12053-list-0004" style="custom">
                        <item n="4."/>
                    </list>
               </p>
               <p>The management and administration, hospitality and tourism, and information technology faculties strive to promote the use of English in classrooms settings with the use of English
                    in class by lecturers, and by prescribing English reading material for their subjects and courses. However, this prescribed use of English appears to be less well received by the
                    students in these faculties, as there is a reported gap in the amount of reading that students actually do in English. This can be attributed to the fact that many of these
                    students are used to Putonghua in educational settings, and may have difficulties in learning their course materials through the medium of English.</p>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0100" type="section">
               <head>A comparison of MUST's language policy, and the realities of English medium teaching</head>
               <p>Regarding the university's language policies and the realities of English medium teaching, the university does have a policy on English medium teaching and learning, yet this study
                    has indicated that the policy is not implemented evenly across all the faculties at MUST, and actual practice often disadvantages local Macau students at the institution. These
                    students predominantly come from Cantonese‐speaking homes in Macau, and while they may aspire to study at an English‐medium university, in reality, in many instances, they may be
                    required to receive instruction through Putonghua (cf. Table <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0002"/>). Unlike their mainland counterparts, the Macau students have received their high
                    school education in the medium of Cantonese. Despite this, the ideological perception of the value and role of English is unmistakable and shared across all the faculties where
                    English is claimed to be used as a medium of teaching. In addition, students’ actual use and exposure to English in their ‘English‐medium classrooms’ is largely dependent on the
                    faculty (and degree program) concerned. It would further appear that the university uses English for marketing purposes when recruiting students, which highlights the money‐making
                    potential of English in China (see Hu <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0016"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0016"/>). For example, in the university's first annual report, published in 2012, it is stated in the introduction
                    that MUST is ‘a local university with an international outlook’ and further that ‘internationalization [at the university] is increasing’, which suggests that the concept of
                    internationalism is central to the university's outlook. In addition to this, the university's English‐medium teaching handbook (Macau University of Science and Technology Quality
                    Assurance Office <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0026"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0026"/>: 3) states explicitly that ‘[improving] the level of English medium teaching in the University is a significant part of its
                    internationalization.’ Although MUST does not appear to directly ‘sell’ English, it does play on the ideology of internationalism, and faculties do interpret the use of English as
                    subscribing to this ‘international outlook’, with several faculties stating explicitly that the English language increases the global competitive utility of the university, as
                    noted on its website (see Introduction). Some faculties, such as the faculty of information technology, have noted on their websites that they ‘have also been gradually increasing
                    the use of English as the medium of instruction’ (Macau University of Science and Technology <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0025"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0025"/>), while the faculty of humanities and arts appears
                    more liberal in its approach to languages, stating that the faculty encourages students to ‘broaden their international view and learn multinational languages’ (Macau University of
                    Science and Technology <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0025"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0025"/>).</p>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0110" type="section">
               <head>The attitudes of students and educators toward English medium instruction</head>
               <p>Regarding the attitudes of students and educators at MUST, it seems it is the general perception that English medium instruction internationalizes the university, even though the
                    university almost exclusively recruits mainland Chinese and Macau students – many of whom end up living and working in mainland China. It is precisely this promotion of
                    internationalism by the university which leads students and faculty to adopt the view that the English language is instrumental in globalizing the university, and by extension one
                    assumes, the students themselves. The belief that MUST is more international if its courses are conducted in English is overwhelmingly supported by the student and teaching staff
                    population, with 85 per cent of the surveyed respondents agreeing with this notion.</p>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0120" type="section">
               <head>The perceived impact of English‐medium courses on learners</head>
               <p>The beliefs and attitudes about English as well as the exposure to English on the MUST campus do appear to impact the personal lives of Chinese university learners and teaching
                    staff, especially in the way they access content on the Internet, and socialize with their friends. Also noteworthy is that 55 per cent of students in this study reported to speak
                    and/or read English within two days of the survey, and the most surprising result of this study is students and lecturers claiming to use English when socializing with their
                    friends, co‐workers, classmates, and online (virtual) communities (cf. Tables <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0003"/> and <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>
                  <ref type="table" target="#weng12053-tbl-0004"/>). In fact 27.7 per cent of
                    students reportedly last used English for socializing, with the same amount of students claiming to use English for their studies in their leisure time. The results of the
                    extra‐curricular use of English also correspond loosely to the amount of English students reportedly are exposed to in their respective faculties, with hospitality and tourism as
                    well as management and administration students reportedly using English the most in their spare time.</p>
               <p>It was also found that the responses of the sub‐sample of students that came from Macau did not largely differ in any significant fashion from those of the mainland Chinese sample,
                    particularly with reference to the reported patterns of language use at the university. However, there was one major difference with reference to the intended careers of students,
                    with Macau students reporting that English had a practical use for their future employment in the territory. Many Macau students reported having part‐time employment in offices and
                    the casinos of Macau. One student commented as follows regarding her current workplace, a casino named ‘The Venetian’: <list xml:id="weng12053-list-0005" style="custom">
                        <item n="5."/>
                    </list>
               </p>
               <p>Interviews with Macau students thus appeared to indicate that the English language had a clear instrumental value for them in their intended careers, which typically it may not have
                    for mainland students, most of whom return to mainland China. As the gaming (casino) industry is by far the largest economic industry in Macau, directly employing 75 out of every
                    1,000 people in the local Macau workforce (DSEC <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0023"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0023"/>), knowledge of Putonghua and English is increasingly important in order to cater to the influx of
                    mainland Chinese as well as other Asian and foreign tourists. Many of the casinos are also multinational, with corporate headquarters in the US (e.g. Las Vegas Sands Corporation),
                    and hire a number of foreign workers in their Macau operations, and as a result English appears to be a major language of communication in these multicultural settings, as the
                    Macau student pointed out in example (5) above. In comparison with mainland students at MUST, who mainly place an ideological value on English (a kind of local ‘paper value’),
                    Macau students view English as an important necessity for their current and future careers in Macau. Interestingly, students at MUST also reported an awareness of a ‘Chinese
                    variety of English’, with some 51 per cent of learners reporting that they heard this variety of English in their classrooms. With the majority of students (76%) happy with the way
                    their courses are conducted through the medium of English, it would appear that students do not view the Chinese variety (or varieties?) of English particularly negatively.</p>
               <p>In addition, the current status of English medium instruction at MUST also appears to be a result of coping mechanisms of teaching staff and students. With some of the teaching
                    staff not proficient in English, and students that do not have experience in learning through the medium of English, this study indicates that ‘immersion’ in the language at this
                    university is unlikely to be a total success. This is especially evident in the gap that exists between the amount of reading that is prescribed in English and the amount of
                    reading that students actually do in the language, with many opting to buy and read Chinese editions of their course books.</p>
               <p>This study is part of a large‐scale sociolinguistic project to evaluate the impact and actual (reported) use of English on Chinese university campuses, in terms of the values that
                    learners and other English‐medium instruction stakeholders have about English as well as the realities that all stakeholders confront in these educational contexts. This present
                    study predicts that future research requires ethnographic studies to determine the use of English by Chinese students in terms of identity (re)construction in interaction, as well
                    as the kind of social information which might be indexed (Silverstein <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0029"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0029"/>; <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0030"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0030"/>) by the use of English (such as the
                    study of Wu <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0031"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0031"/>). Future studies may also probe the actual language use of teachers and students in their educational settings, with the view to
                    establishing the amount of code‐switching and/or actual English use within academic discourse settings on Chinese university campuses.</p>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0130" type="section">
               <head>The linguistic worlds of students and staff</head>
               <p>It was revealed in this study that the linguistic backgrounds of the students and teaching staff are highly diverse, with only 36.5 per cent of student respondents using Putonghua
                    as a first language. In terms of this sociolinguistic context, future studies may wish to explore how the current language shift towards Putonghua across China is taking place, and
                    at what rate, especially since people in mainland China are becoming increasingly mobile. This brings us to a key question regarding the linguistic worlds of students and lecturers
                    at Chinese universities: to what extent do the students’ perceptions and attitudes regarding the value of English impact their everyday linguistic worlds? Some answers to this
                    question are provided in this paper, which show that Chinese students and teaching staff live in linguistic worlds that are in constant flux and highly adaptable. For instance, the
                    major language of interaction on campus is Putonghua and students come from backgrounds where their linguistic worlds are constantly changing – during high school, many of these
                    students learnt through the medium of Putonghua while speaking another Chinese language variety or varieties at home and with their friends on their high school campuses, and when
                    these students arrived in Macau they were faced with a sudden challenge to study through the medium of English, and negotiate a linguistic environment in Macau where the major
                    common language is Cantonese. In the context of world Englishes, this study provides an interesting account of the current push by policy makers in Macau and Greater China to
                    advertise and promote English as a medium of teaching in higher education. This study also points to the gulf that may exist between university policies and the (socio)linguistic
                    realities of actual language use on Chinese university campuses. In addition to cross‐border education and student mobility, the personal use of English along with other languages
                    by the students at this university highlights the need for the development of sociolinguistic theory capable of explaining the complexity of language contact in highly mobile
                    markets and mobile communities, specifically within globalization and migration paradigms (Blommaert <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0002"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0002"/>; Bolton <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0004"/>;
                        <ref type="note" target="#weng12053-bib-0005"/>
                  <ref type="bibr" target="#weng12053-bib-0005"/>).</p>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div xml:id="weng12053-sec-0140" type="section">
            <head>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</head>
            <p>I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Kingsley Bolton for his assistance and generous comments during this research project, as well as the drafting stages of this paper, and to
                John Bacon‐Shone for his advice on the design of the questionnaire.</p>
         </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="references">
            <listBibl>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0001" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0001"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0002" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0002"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0003" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0003"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0004" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0004"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0005" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0005"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0006" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0006"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0007" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0007"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0009" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0009"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0010" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0010"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0011" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0011"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0012" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0012"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0013" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0013"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0014" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0014"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0015" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0015"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0016" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0016"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0017" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0017"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0018" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0018"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0019" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0019"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0020" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0020"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0021" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0021"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0022" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0022"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0023" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0023"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0024" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0024"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0025" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0025"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0026" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0026"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0027" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0027"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0028" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0028"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0029" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0029"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0030" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0030"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0031" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0031"/>
               <bibl xml:id="weng12053-bib-0032" corresp="#weng12053-cit-0032"/>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0001">
                  <monogr>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bacon‐Shone</surname>, <forename type="first">John</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">David</forename>
                           <surname>Nunan</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Survey on the use of English by students at The University of Hong Kong. Internal
                        report</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1996"/>
                        <pubPlace>Hong Kong</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>The University of Hong Kong</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0002">
                  <monogr>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Blommaert</surname>, <forename type="first">Jan</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="m" type="main">The
                        sociolinguistics of globalization</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2010"/>
                        <pubPlace>Cambridge</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Cambridge University Press</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0003">
                  <monogr>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>, <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Chinese Englishes: A sociolinguistic history</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2003"/>
                        <pubPlace>Cambridge</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Cambridge University
                    Press</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="other" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0004">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>, <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">The linguistic worlds of Hong Kong and Guangzhou</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2012"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0005">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>, <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <editor>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Nils‐Lennart</forename>
                           <surname>Johannesson</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </editor>
                     <editor>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Gunnel</forename>
                           <surname>Melchers</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </editor>
                     <title level="a" type="main">World Englishes, globalization, and language worlds</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Of butterflies and birds, of dialects and genres: Essays in honour of Philip
                        Shaw</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="227">227</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="51">51</biblScope>
                        <date when="2013"/>
                        <pubPlace>Stockholm</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Acta Universitatis
                        Stockholmiensis</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0006">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>, <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">David</forename>
                           <surname>Graddol</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">English in China today</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">28</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="3">3</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="9">9</biblScope>
                        <date when="2012"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0007">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Bolton</surname>, <forename type="first">Kingsley</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Maria</forename>
                           <surname>Kuteeva</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">English as an academic language at a Swedish university: Parallel language use and
                        the ‘threat’ of English</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">33</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1">1</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="19">19</biblScope>
                        <date when="2012"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0009">
                  <monogr>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Briggs</surname>, <forename type="first">Charles L</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Learning how to ask: A sociolinguistic appraisal of the role of the interview in social science research</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1986"/>
                        <pubPlace>Cambridge</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Cambridge University Press</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0010">
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">The basic law of the Macao Special
                        Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1993"/>
                        <pubPlace>Macao</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Legal Affairs Bureau</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0011">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Evans</surname>, <forename type="first">Betsy E</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Chinese perceptions of Inner Circle varieties of English</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">29</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="270">270</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="280">280</biblScope>
                        <date when="2010"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0012">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Fong</surname>, <forename type="first">Emily Tsz Yan</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">English in China: Some thoughts after the Beijing Olympics</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">25</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="44">44</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="9">9</biblScope>
                        <date when="2009"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0013">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Gao</surname>, <forename type="first">Xuesong</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Shifting motivational discourses among mainland Chinese students in an English medium tertiary institution in Hong Kong: A longitudinal inquiry</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Studies in Higher Education</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">33</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="599">599</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="614">614</biblScope>
                        <date when="2008"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0014">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Gao</surname>, <forename type="first">Yihong</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Ying</forename>
                           <surname>Cheng</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Yuan</forename>
                           <surname>Zhao</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Yan</forename>
                           <surname>Zhou</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Self‐identity changes and English learning among Chinese
                        undergraduates</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">24</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="39">39</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="51">51</biblScope>
                        <date when="2005"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0015">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>He</surname>, <forename type="first">Deyuan</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">David C.S.</forename>
                           <surname>Li</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Language attitudes and linguistic features in the “China English”
                    debate</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">28</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="70">70</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="89">89</biblScope>
                        <date when="2009"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0016">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Hu</surname>, <forename type="first">Guangwei</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">The craze for English‐medium education in China: Driving forces and looming consequences</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">25</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="47">47</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="54">54</biblScope>
                        <date when="2009"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0017">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Hu</surname>, <forename type="first">Guangwei</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Lubna</forename>
                           <surname>Alsagoff</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">A public policy perspective on English medium instruction in
                    China</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">31</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="365">365</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="82">82</biblScope>
                        <date when="2010"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0018">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Hu</surname>, <forename type="first">Xiaoqiong</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Why China English should stand alongside British, American and the other world Englishes</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">20</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="26">26</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="33">33</biblScope>
                        <date when="2004"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0019">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Hu</surname>, <forename type="first">Xiaoqiong</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">China English, at home and in the world</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">21</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="27">27</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="38">38</biblScope>
                        <date when="2005"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0020">
                  <monogr>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Judd</surname>, <forename type="first">Charles. M.</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Eliot R.</forename>
                           <surname>Smith</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Louise H.</forename>
                           <surname>Kidder</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Research methods in social relations</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="1991"/>
                        <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0021">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Kirkpatrick</surname>, <forename type="first">Andy</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Zhichang</forename>
                           <surname>Xu</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Chinese pragmatic norms and ‘China English</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World
                        Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">21</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="269">269</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="79">79</biblScope>
                        <date when="2002"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0022">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Li</surname>, <forename type="first">Mei</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">Mark</forename>
                           <surname>Bray</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Cross‐border flows of students for higher education: Push‐pull factors and
                        motivations of mainland Chinese students in Hong Kong and Macau</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Higher Education</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">53</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="791">791</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="818">818</biblScope>
                        <date when="2007"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="other" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0023">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <orgName>Macao Special Administrative Region Statistics and Census Service (DSEC)</orgName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Yearbook of statistics, 2009</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <idno type="URI"> 
                        <idno type="url">http://www.dsec.gov.mo/Statistic.aspx?lang=en‐US</idno>
                     </idno>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2010"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="other" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0024">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <orgName>Macao Special Administrative Region Statistics and Census Service (DSEC)</orgName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Usual languages in Macao</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <idno type="URI"> 
                        <idno type="url">http://www.dsec.gov.mo/Statistic.aspx?NodeGuid=8d4d5779‐c0d3‐‐42f0‐ae71‐‐8b747bdc8d88</idno>
                     </idno>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2011"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0025">
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Macau University of
                        Science and Technology Annual Report</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2012"/>
                        <pubPlace>Macau</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Macau University of Science and Technology</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0026">
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">English medium teaching handbook</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <date when="2010"/>
                        <pubPlace>Macau</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Macau University of Science and Technology Quality Assurance
                        Office</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0027">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Moody</surname>, <forename type="first">Andrew</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Macau English: status, functions and forms</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">English Today</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">34</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="3">3</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="15">15</biblScope>
                        <date when="2008"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0028">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Skyrme</surname>, <forename type="first">Gillian</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Entering the university: The differentiated experience of two Chinese international students in a New Zealand university</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Studies in
                        Higher Education</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">32</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="357">357</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="72">72</biblScope>
                        <date when="2007"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0029">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Silverstein</surname>, <forename type="first">Michael</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <editor>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">E.</forename>
                           <surname>Mertz</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </editor>
                     <editor>
                        <persName>
                           <forename type="first">R.</forename>
                           <surname>Parmentier</surname>
                        </persName>
                     </editor>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Language and the culture of gender: At the intersection of structure, usage and ideology</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="m" type="main">Semiotic Mediation: Sociocultural and
                        Psychological Perspectives</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="219">219</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="59">59</biblScope>
                        <date when="1985"/>
                        <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
                        <publisher>Academic
                        Press</publisher>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0030">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Silverstein</surname>, <forename type="first">Michael</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">Language and Communication</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">23</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="193">193</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="229">229</biblScope>
                        <date when="2003"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0031">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Wu</surname>, <forename type="first">Yi An</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Code‐mixing by English‐Chinese bilingual teachers of the People's Republic of China</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">4</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="303">303</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="17">17</biblScope>
                        <date when="1985"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
               <biblStruct type="journal" xml:id="weng12053-cit-0032">
                  <analytic>
                     <author>
                        <persName>
                           <surname>Young</surname>, <forename type="first">Ming Yee Carissa</forename>
                        </persName>
                     </author>
                     <title level="a" type="main">Macao students’ attitudes toward English: a post‐1999 survey</title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title level="j" type="main">World Englishes</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">25</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="479">479</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="490">490</biblScope>
                        <date when="2006"/>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
            </listBibl>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
