<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/common/dtd" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"
  xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
  xmlns:xd="http://www.oxygenxml.com/ns/doc/xsl" xml:lang="en">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
          xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Evolving general practice
          consultation in Britain: issues of length and context</title>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <availability>
          <p>Copyright © 2002, BMJ</p>
        </availability>
        <date>2002, </date>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <biblStruct type="article">
          <analytic>
            <author><persName><surname>Freeman</surname><forename type="first">George
                K</forename></persName><roleName>professor of general
                practice</roleName><affiliation>Centre for Primary Care and Social Medicine,
                Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London W6 8RP,
              </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Horder</surname><forename type="first">John
                P</forename></persName><roleName>past president</roleName><affiliation>Royal College
                of General Practitioners, London SW7 1PU, </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Howie</surname><forename type="first">John G
                R</forename></persName><roleName>emeritus professor of general
                practice</roleName><affiliation>Department of General Practice, University of
                Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9DX, </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Hungin</surname><forename type="first">A
                Pali</forename></persName><roleName>professor of general
                practice</roleName><affiliation>Centre for Health Studies, University of Durham,
                Durham DH1 3HN, </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Hill</surname><forename type="first">Alison
                P</forename></persName><roleName>general practitioner</roleName><affiliation>Kilburn
                Park Medical Centre, London NW6, </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Shah</surname><forename type="first">Nayan
                C</forename></persName><roleName>general practitioner</roleName><affiliation>Royal
                College of General Practitioners, London SW7 1PU, </affiliation></author>
            <author><persName><surname>Wilson</surname><forename type="first"
                >Andrew</forename></persName><roleName>senior
                lecturer</roleName><affiliation>Department of General Practice and Primary Health
                Care, University of Leicester, Leicester LE5 4PW</affiliation></author>
            <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
              xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Evolving general
              practice consultation in Britain: issues of length and context</title>
          </analytic>
          <monogr>
            <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
              xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="j" type="pmc">bmj</title>
            <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
              xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="j" type="pubmed">BMJ</title>
            <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
              xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="j" type="publisher">BMJ</title>
            <idno xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
              xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="ISSN">0959-8138</idno>
            <imprint>
              <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">BMJ</publisher>
              <date type="Published" when="2002-04-13"/>
              <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">324</biblScope>
              <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="issue">7342</biblScope>
              <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">880</biblScope>
              <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">882</biblScope>
            </imprint>
          </monogr>
          <idno type="other">jBMJ.v324.i7342.pg880</idno>
          <idno type="pmid">11950738</idno>
        </biblStruct>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
    <revisionDesc>
      <change when="2002-02-07">Accepted</change>
    </revisionDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
      <p>In 1999 Shah<ref type="bibr" target="#B1">1</ref> and others said that the Royal College of
        General Practitioners should advocate longer consultations in general practice as a matter
        of policy. The college set up a working group chaired by A P Hungin, and a systematic review
        of literature on consultation length in general practice was commissioned. The working group
        agreed that the available evidence would be hard to interpret without discussion of the
        changing context within which consultations now take place. For many years general
        practitioners and those who have surveyed patients' opinions in the United Kingdom have
        complained about short consultation time, despite a steady increase in actual mean length.
        Recently Mechanic pointed out that this is also true in the United States.<ref type="bibr"
          target="#B2">2</ref> Is there any justification for a further increase in mean time
        allocated per consultation in general practice?</p>
      <p>We report on the outcome of extensive debate among a group of general practitioners with an
        interest in the process of care, with reference to the interim findings of the commissioned
        systematic review and our personal databases. The review identified 14 relevant papers. </p>
      <div type="subjects">
        <head>Longer consultations: benefits for patients</head>
        <p>The systematic review consistently showed that doctors with longer consultation times
          prescribe less and offer more advice on lifestyle and other health promoting activities.
          Longer consultations have been significantly associated with better recognition and
          handling of psychosocial problems<ref type="bibr" target="#B3">3</ref> and with better
          patient enablement.<ref type="bibr" target="#B4">4</ref> Also clinical care for some
          chronic illnesses is better in practices with longer booked intervals between one
          appointment and the next.<ref type="bibr" target="#B5">5</ref> It is not clear whether
          time is itself the main influence or whether some doctors insist on more time.</p>
        <p>A national survey in 1998 reported that most (87%) patients were satisfied with the
          length of their most recent consultation.<ref type="bibr" target="#B6">6</ref>
          Satisfaction with any service will be high if expectations are met or exceeded. But
          expectations are modified by previous experience.<ref type="bibr" target="#B7">7</ref> The
          result is that primary care patients are likely to be satisfied with what they are used to
          unless the context modifies the effects of their own experience.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Context of modern consultations</head>
        <p>Shorter consultations were more appropriate when the population was younger, when even a
          brief absence from employment due to sickness required a doctor's note, and when many
          simple remedies were available only on prescription. Recently at least five important
          influences have increased the content and hence the potential length of the
          consultation.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Participatory consultation style</head>
        <p>The most effective consultations are those in which doctors most directly acknowledge and
          perhaps respond to patients' problems and concerns. In addition, for patients to be
          committed to taking advantage of medical advice they must agree with both the goals and
          methods proposed. A landmark publication in the United Kingdom was <hi rend="italic"
            >Meetings Between Experts</hi>, which argued that while doctors are the experts about
          medical problems in general patients are the experts on how they themselves experience
          these problems.<ref type="bibr" target="#B8">8</ref> New emphasis on teaching consulting
          skills in general practice advocated specific attention to the patient's agenda, beliefs,
          understanding, and agreement. Currently the General Medical Council, aware that
          communication difficulties underlie many complaints about doctors, has further emphasised
          the importance of involving patients in consultations in its revised guidance to medical
            schools.<ref type="bibr" target="#B9">9</ref> More patient involvement should give a
          better outcome, but this participatory style usually lengthens consultations.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Extended professional agenda</head>
        <p>The traditional consultation in general practice was brief.<ref type="bibr" target="#B2"
            >2</ref> The patient presented symptoms and the doctor prescribed treatment. In 1957
          Balint gave new insights into the meaning of symptoms.<ref type="bibr" target="#B10"
            >10</ref> By 1979 an enhanced model of consultation was presented, in which the doctors
          dealt with ongoing as well as presenting problems and added health promotion and education
          about future appropriate use of services.<ref type="bibr" target="#B11">11</ref> Now, with
          an ageing population and more community care of chronic illness, there are more issues to
          be considered at each consultation. Ideas of what constitutes good general practice are
          more complex.<ref type="bibr" target="#B12">12</ref> Good practice now includes both
          extended care of chronic medical problems—for example, coronary heart disease<ref
            type="bibr" target="#B13">13</ref>—and a public health role. At first this model was
          restricted to those who lead change (“early adopters”) and enthusiasts<ref type="bibr"
            target="#B14">14</ref> but now it is embedded in professional and managerial
          expectations of good practice.</p>
        <p>Adequate time is essential. It may be difficult for an elderly patient with several
          active problems to undress, be examined, and get adequate professional consideration in
          under 15 minutes. Here the doctor is faced with the choice of curtailing the consultation
          or of reducing the time available for the next patient. Having to cope with these
          situations often contributes to professional dissatisfaction.<ref type="bibr"
            target="#B15">15</ref> This combination of more care, more options, and more genuine
          discussion of those options with informed patient choice inevitably leads to pressure on
          time.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Access problems</head>
        <p>In a service free at the point of access, rising demand will tend to increase rationing
          by delay. But attempts to improve access by offering more consultations at short notice
          squeeze consultation times.</p>
        <p>While appointment systems can and should reduce queuing time for consultations, they have
          long tended to be used as a brake on total demand.<ref type="bibr" target="#B16">16</ref>
          This may seriously erode patients' confidence in being able to see their doctor or nurse
          when they need to. Patients are offered appointments further ahead but may keep these even
          if their symptoms have remitted “just in case.” Availability of consultations is thus
          blocked. Receptionists are then inappropriately blamed for the inadequate access to
          doctors.</p>
        <p>In response to perception of delay, the government has set targets in the NHS plan of
          “guaranteed access to a primary care professional within 24 hours and to a primary care
          doctor within 48 hours.” Implementation is currently being negotiated.</p>
        <p>Virtually all patients think that they would not consult unless it was absolutely
          necessary. They do not think they are wasting NHS time and do not like being made to feel
          so. But underlying general practitioners' willingness to make patients wait several days
          is their perception that few of the problems are urgent. Patients and general
          practitioners evidently do not agree about the urgency of so called minor problems. To
          some extent general practice in the United Kingdom may have scored an “own goal” by
          setting up perceived access barriers (appointment systems and out of hours cooperatives)
          in the attempt to increase professional standards and control demand in a service that is
          free at the point of access.</p>
        <p>A further government initiative has been to bypass general practice with new
          services—notably, walk-in centres (primary care clinics in which no appointment is needed)
          and NHS Direct (a professional telephone helpline giving advice on simple remedies and
          access to services). Introduced widely and rapidly, these services each potentially
          provide significant features of primary care—namely, quick access to skilled health advice
          and first line treatment.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Loss of interpersonal continuity</head>
        <p>If a patient has to consult several different professionals, particularly over a short
          period of time, there is inevitable duplication of stories, risk of naive diagnoses,
          potential for conflicting advice, and perhaps loss of trust. Trust is essential if
          patients are to accept the “wait and see” management policy which is, or should be, an
          important part of the management of self limiting conditions, which are often on the
          boundary between illness and non-illness.<ref type="bibr" target="#B17">17</ref> Such
          duplication again increases pressure for more extra (unscheduled) consultations resulting
          in late running and professional frustration.<ref type="bibr" target="#B18">18</ref>
        </p>
        <p>Mechanic described how loss of longitudinal (and perhaps personal and relational<ref
            type="bibr" target="#B19">19</ref>) continuity influences the perception and use of time
          through an inability to build on previous consultations.<ref type="bibr" target="#B2"
            >2</ref> Knowing the doctor well, particularly in smaller practices, is associated with
          enhanced patient enablement in shorter time.<ref type="bibr" target="#B4">4</ref> Though
          Mechanic pointed out that three quarters of UK patients have been registered with their
          general practitioner five years or more, this may be misleading. Practices are growing,
          with larger teams and more registered patients. Being registered with a doctor in a larger
          practice is usually no guarantee that the patient will be able to see the same doctor or
          the doctor of his or her choice, who may be different. Thus the system does not encourage
          adequate personal continuity. This adds to pressure on time and reduces both patient and
          professional satisfaction.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Health service reforms</head>
        <p>Finally, for the past 15 years the NHS has experienced unprecedented change with a
          succession of major administrative reforms. Recent reforms have focused on an NHS led by
          primary care, including the aim of shifting care from the secondary specialist sector to
          primary care. One consequence is increased demand for primary care of patients with more
          serious and less stable problems. With the limited piloting of reforms we do not know
          whether such major redirection can be achieved without greatly altering the delicate
          balance between expectations (of both patients and staff) and what is delivered.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>The future</head>
        <p>We think that the way ahead must embrace both longer mean consultation times and more
          flexibility. More time is needed for high quality consultations with patients with major
          and complex problems of all kinds. But patients also need access to simpler services and
          advice. This should be more appropriate (and cost less) when it is given by professionals
          who know the patient and his or her medical history and social circumstances. For doctors,
          the higher quality associated with longer consultations may lead to greater professional
          satisfaction and, if these longer consultations are combined with more realistic
          scheduling, to reduced levels of stress.<ref type="bibr" target="#B20">20</ref> They will
          also find it easier to develop further the care of chronic disease.</p>
        <p>The challenge posed to general practice by walk-in centres and NHS Direct is
          considerable, and the diversion of funding from primary care is large. The risk of waste
          and duplication increases as more layers of complexity are added to a primary care service
          that started out as something familiar, simple, and local and which is still envied in
          other developed countries.<ref type="bibr" target="#B21">21</ref> Access needs to be
          simple, and the advantages of personal knowledge and trust in minimising duplication and
          overmedicalisation need to be exploited.</p>
        <p>We must ensure better communication and access so that patients can more easily deal with
          minor issues and queries with someone they know and trust and avoid the formality and
          inconvenience of a full face to face consultation. Too often this has to be with a
          different professional, unfamiliar with the nuances of the case. There should be far more
          managerial emphasis on helping patients to interact with their chosen practitioner<ref
            type="bibr" target="#B22">22</ref>; such a programme has been described.<ref type="bibr"
            target="#B23">23</ref> Modern information systems make it much easier to record which
          doctor(s) a patient prefers to see and to monitor how often this is achieved. The
          telephone is hardly modern but is underused. Email avoids the problems inherent in
          arranging simultaneous availability necessary for telephone consultations but at the cost
          of reducing the communication of emotions. There is a place for both.<ref type="bibr"
            target="#B2">2</ref> Access without prior appointment is a valued feature of primary
          care, and we need to know more about the right balance between planned and ad hoc
          consulting.</p>
      </div>
      <div>
        <head>Next steps</head>
        <p>General practitioners do not behave in a uniform way. They can be categorised as slow,
          medium, and fast and react in different ways to changes in consulting speed.<ref
            type="bibr" target="#B18">18</ref> They are likely to have differing views about a
          widespread move to lengthen consultation time. We do not need further confirmation that
          longer consultations are desirable and necessary, but research could show us the best way
          to learn how to introduce them with minimal disruption to the way in which patients and
          practices like primary care to be provided.<ref type="bibr" target="#B24">24</ref> We also
          need to learn how to make the most of available time in complex consultations.</p>
        <p>Devising appropriate incentives and helping practices move beyond just reacting to demand
          in the traditional way by working harder and faster is perhaps our greatest challenge in
          the United Kingdom. The new primary are trusts need to work together with the growing
          primary care research networks to carry out the necessary development work. In particular,
          research is needed on how a primary care team can best provide the right balance of quick
          access and interpersonal knowledge and trust.</p>
      </div>
    </body>
    <back>
      <div type="acknowledgements">
        <head>Acknowledgements</head>
        <p>We thank the other members of the working group: Susan Childs, Paul Freeling, Iona Heath,
          Marshall Marinker, and Bonnie Sibbald. We also thank Fenny Green of the Royal College of
          General Practitioners for administrative help.</p>
      </div>
      <div type="references">
        <listBibl>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B1">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Shah</surname><forename type="first"
                  >NC</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Viewpoint:
                Consultation time—time for a change? Still the “perfunctory work of perfunctory
                men!”</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Br J Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1999</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">49</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">497</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B2">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Mechanic</surname><forename type="first"
                  >D</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">How should hamsters
                run? Some observations about sufficient patient time in primary care</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2001</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">323</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">266</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">268</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B3">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Howie</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JGR</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Porter</surname><forename type="first"
                  >AMD</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Heaney</surname><forename type="first"
                  >DJ</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Hopton</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JL</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Long to short
                consultation ratio: a proxy measure of quality of care for general practice</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Br J Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1991</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">41</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">48</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">54</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B4">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Howie</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JGR</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Heaney</surname><forename type="first"
                  >DJ</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Maxwell</surname><forename type="first"
                  >M</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Walker</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JJ</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Freeman</surname><forename type="first"
                  >GK</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Rai</surname><forename type="first"
                >H</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Quality at general
                practice consultations: cross-sectional survey</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1999</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">319</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">738</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">743</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B5">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Kaplan</surname><forename type="first"
                  >SH</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Greenfield</surname><forename type="first"
                  >S</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Ware</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JE</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Assessing the effects
                of physician-patient interactions on the outcome of chronic disease</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Med Care</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1989</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">27</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">110</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">125</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B6">
            <monogr>
              <editor><persName><surname>Airey</surname><forename type="first"
                  >C</forename></persName></editor>
              <editor><persName><surname>Erens</surname><forename type="first"
                  >B</forename></persName></editor>
              <title level="j">National surveys of NHS patients: general practice, 1998</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1999</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">NHS Executive</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B7">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Hart</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JT</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Expectations of health
                care: promoted, managed or shared?</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Health Expect</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1998</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">1</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">3</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">13</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B8">
            <monogr>
              <author><persName><surname>Tuckett</surname><forename type="first"
                  >D</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Boulton</surname><forename type="first"
                  >M</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Olson</surname><forename type="first"
                  >C</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Williams</surname><forename type="first"
                  >A</forename></persName></author>
              <title level="j">Meetings between experts: an approach to sharing ideas in medical
                consultations</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1985</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">Tavistock Publications</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <bibl xml:id="B9">General Medical Council. <title level="j">Draft recommendations on
              undergraduate medical education</title>. July 2001.
            www.gmc-uk.org/med_ed/tomorrowsdoctors/index.htm (accessed 2 Jan 2002).</bibl>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B10">
            <monogr>
              <author><persName><surname>Balint</surname><forename type="first"
                  >M</forename></persName></author>
              <title level="j">The doctor, his patient and the illness</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1957</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">Tavistock</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B11">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Stott</surname><forename type="first"
                  >NCH</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Davies</surname><forename type="first"
                  >RH</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">The exceptional
                potential in each primary care consultation</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">J R Coll Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1979</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">29</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">210</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">205</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B12">
            <monogr>
              <author><persName><surname>Hill</surname><forename type="first"
                  >AP</forename></persName></author>
              <editor><persName><surname>Hill</surname><forename type="first"
                  >AP</forename></persName></editor>
              <title level="j">What's gone wrong with health care? Challenges for the new
                millennium</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2000</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">King's Fund</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B13">
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">National service framework for coronary heart disease</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2000</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">Department of Health</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B14">
            <monogr>
              <author><persName><surname>Hart</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JT</forename></persName></author>
              <title level="j">A new kind of doctor: the general practitioner's part in the health
                of the community</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1988</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">Merlin Press</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B15">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Morrison</surname><forename type="first"
                  >I</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Smith</surname><forename type="first"
                  >R</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Hamster health
                care</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2000</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">321</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">1541</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">1542</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B16">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Arber</surname><forename type="first"
                  >S</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Sawyer</surname><forename type="first"
                  >L</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Do appointment systems
                work?</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1982</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">284</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">478</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">480</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B17">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Hjortdahl</surname><forename type="first"
                  >P</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Borchgrevink</surname><forename type="first"
                  >CF</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Continuity of care:
                influence of general practitioners' knowledge about their patients on use of
                resources in consultations</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1991</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">303</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">1181</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">1184</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B18">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Howie</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JGR</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Hopton</surname><forename type="first"
                  >JL</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Heaney</surname><forename type="first"
                  >DJ</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Porter</surname><forename type="first"
                  >AMD</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Attitudes to medical
                care, the organization of work, and stress among general practitioners</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Br J Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1992</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">42</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">181</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">185</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="book" xml:id="B19">
            <monogr>
              <author><persName><surname>Freeman</surname><forename type="first"
                  >G</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Shepperd</surname><forename type="first"
                  >S</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Robinson</surname><forename type="first"
                  >I</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Ehrich</surname><forename type="first"
                  >K</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Richards</surname><forename type="first"
                  >SC</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Pitman</surname><forename type="first"
                  >P</forename></persName></author>
              <title level="j">Continuity of care: report of a scoping exercise for the national
                co-ordinating centre for NHS Service Delivery and Organisation R&amp;D (NCCSDO),
                Summer 2000</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2001</date>
                <pubPlace xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">London</pubPlace>
                <publisher xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">NCCSDO</publisher>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B20">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Wilson</surname><forename type="first"
                  >A</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>McDonald</surname><forename type="first"
                  >P</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Hayes</surname><forename type="first"
                  >L</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Cooney</surname><forename type="first"
                  >J</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Longer booking
                intervals in general practice: effects on doctors' stress and arousal</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Br J Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1991</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">41</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">184</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">187</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B21">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>De Maeseneer</surname><forename type="first"
                  >J</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Hjortdahl</surname><forename type="first"
                  >P</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Starfield</surname><forename type="first"
                  >B</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Fix what's wrong, not
                what's right, with general practice in Britain</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">2000</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">320</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">1616</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">1617</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B22">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Freeman</surname><forename type="first"
                  >G</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Hjortdahl</surname><forename type="first"
                  >P</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">What future for
                continuity of care in general practice?</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">BMJ</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1997</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">314</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">1870</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">1873</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B23">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Kibbe</surname><forename type="first"
                  >DC</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Bentz</surname><forename type="first"
                  >E</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>McLaughlin</surname><forename type="first"
                  >CP</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Continuous quality
                improvement for continuity of care</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">J Fam Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1993</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">36</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">304</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">308</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
          <biblStruct type="article" xml:id="B24">
            <analytic>
              <author><persName><surname>Williams</surname><forename type="first"
                  >M</forename></persName></author>
              <author><persName><surname>Neal</surname><forename type="first"
                  >RD</forename></persName></author>
              <title xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" level="a" type="main">Time for a change? The
                process of lengthening booking intervals in general practice</title>
            </analytic>
            <monogr>
              <title level="j">Br J Gen Pract</title>
              <imprint>
                <date xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="year">1998</date>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="vol">48</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="fpage">1783</biblScope>
                <biblScope xmlns:els="http://www.elsevier.com/xml/ja/dtd"
                  xmlns:tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" type="lpage">1786</biblScope>
              </imprint>
            </monogr>
          </biblStruct>
        </listBibl>
      </div>
      <div type="fn-group">
        <note place="inline"><p>Funding: Meetings of the working group in 1999-2000 were funded by
            the Scientific Foundation Board of the RCGP.</p></note>
        <note place="inline"><p>Competing interests: None declared.</p></note>
      </div>
    </back>
  </text>
</TEI>
