<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">Femoral neuropathy following cardiac catheterization for balloon mitral valvotomy</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd</publisher>
            <date>1999</date>
            <availability status="restricted">
               <licence>
                  <p>full-transfer</p>
               </licence>
            </availability>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct>
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">Abraham</forename>
                        <surname>Kuruvilla</surname>
                     </persName>
                     <email>akuruvilla@doctor4u.com</email>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="department">Department of Neurology</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <addrLine>Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology</addrLine>
                           <addrLine>Trivandrum 695 011</addrLine>
                           <country key="IN">INDIA</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">Gigy</forename>
                        <surname>Kuruttukulam</surname>
                     </persName>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="department">Department of Neurology</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <addrLine>Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology</addrLine>
                           <addrLine>Trivandrum 695 011</addrLine>
                           <country key="IN">INDIA</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <forename type="first">Bimal</forename>
                        <surname>Francis</surname>
                     </persName>
                     <affiliation>
                        <orgName type="department">Department of Cardiology</orgName>
                        <address>
                           <addrLine>Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology</addrLine>
                           <addrLine>Trivandrum 695 011</addrLine>
                           <country key="IN">INDIA</country>
                        </address>
                     </affiliation>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">Femoral neuropathy following cardiac catheterization for balloon mitral valvotomy</title>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="abbrev">IJCA</title>
                  <imprint>
                     <date type="Accepted" when="1999-07-14"/>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1016/S0167-5273(99)00132-1</idno>
               <idno type="PII">S0167-5273(99)00132-1</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
      <profileDesc>
         <abstract>
            <p>Femoral neuropathy is a very rare complication of cardiac catheterization. We report an adult female who developed femoral neuropathy after undergoing cardiac
                    catheterization through femoral vein for balloon mitral valvotomy. Neuropathy was confirmed by electromyography and nerve conduction studies and the patient showed spontaneous
                    recovery over a course of 6 months. Use of prolonged digital pressure for post-procedural hemostasis is implicated as possible etiology. Such complications can be prevented by
                    minimising the procedural time, avoiding injury to the vessels and maintaining optimal posture of patient’s thigh by limiting abduction and external rotation of
                    hip.</p>
            <p>Femoral neuropathy is a very rare complication of cardiac catheterization. We report an adult female who developed femoral neuropathy after undergoing cardiac
                    catheterization through femoral vein for balloon mitral valvotomy. Neuropathy was confirmed by electromyography and nerve conduction studies and the patient showed spontaneous
                    recovery over a course of 6 months. Use of prolonged digital pressure for post-procedural hemostasis is implicated as possible etiology. Such complications can be prevented by
                    minimising the procedural time, avoiding injury to the vessels and maintaining optimal posture of patient’s thigh by limiting abduction and external rotation of
                    hip.</p>
         </abstract>
         <textClass>
            <keywords>
               <term>
                Femoral neuropathy
            </term>
               <term>
                Cardiac catheterization
            </term>
               <term>
                Femoral vessel catheterization
            </term>
            </keywords>
         </textClass>
      </profileDesc>
      <revisionDesc>
         <change when="1999-07-08">Received</change>
         <change when="1999-07-14">Accepted</change>
      </revisionDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <div type="ElsevierSections">
            <div n="1">
               <head>Introduction</head>
               <p>Incidence of neuropathic complications following femoral cannulation is very low. However, with the increasing number of cardiac diagnostic and interventional procedures,
                    cardiologists and vascular surgeons are confronted with more and more of arteriovenous fistulas and pseudoaneurysms. Femoral neuropathy may be the only sign in these patients
                        <ref target="#BIB1">[1]</ref>. Complications like traumatic neuropathy can also occur during cardiac catheterization secondary to mechanical or digital pressure
                    for achieving hemostasis <ref target="#BIB2 #BIB3">[2,3]</ref>. Femoral nerve injury can result from retroperitoneal hematoma following systemic anticoagulation
                    therapy after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) <ref target="#BIB4">[4]</ref>. We report a case of femoral neuropathy complicating cardiac
                    catheterization through femoral vein for balloon mitral valvotomy (BMV).</p>
            </div>
            <div n="2">
               <head>Case report</head>
               <p>A 32-year-old woman, with severe mitral stenosis secondary to rheumatic heart disease, was subjected to balloon mitral valvotomy for which the right femoral vein and left
                    femoral artery were punctured using an Inoue catheter. After the procedure, there was difficulty in controlling bleeding from the puncture site on the right. Continuous local
                    digital pressure was applied for achieving hemostasis. The same evening, she developed numbness over the anteromedial aspect of right thigh along with ‘buckling’ of
                    knee while walking. Examination revealed no evidence for hematoma or swelling at the puncture site. Neurological examination revealed abnormalities confined to the right lower
                    extremity with moderate weakness of the quadriceps muscle, absent knee jerk and sensory loss along the medical aspect of thigh and leg. Electrophysiological examination (EMG/NCS)
                    done on the second day after the onset of symptoms revealed significant conduction block across the right inguinal ligament on motor stimulation of the femoral nerve. A follow-up
                    evaluation, after 6 weeks, showed evidence for active as well as chronic denervation changes in the right rectus femoris muscle. The clinical as well as electrodiagnostic
                    evaluation supported the diagnosis of femoral neuropathy at the level of the inguinal ligament. The patient showed full spontaneous recovery after 6 months.</p>
            </div>
            <div n="3">
               <head>Discussion</head>
               <p>Femoral neuropathy following cardiac catheterization can be initially disabling, but it is often completely reversible. Kent et al. <ref target="#BIB5">[5]</ref>, in a study of 9585 cardiac catheterizations, done over a 5-year period, reported that the incidence of femoral neuropathy was only 0.21% (20 patients). Of
                    these 20 patients, 16 had retroperitoneal hematomas and four had groin hematomas or false aneurysm.</p>
               <p>Simon <ref target="#BIB2">[2]</ref> in a study to evaluate mechanical pressure versus digital pressure for hemostasis following cardiac catheterization,
                    concluded that traumatic femoral neuropathy in addition to hematoma formation, arterial occlusion and ischemia could occur as a complication. There was no significant difference in
                    rate of complication between the groups. Our patient did not have any evidence for retroperitoneal hematoma, pseudoaneurysm or hematoma at the puncture site. The likely etiology of
                    femoral neuropathy in our patient could have been the application of prolonged pressure at the puncture site.</p>
               <p>We report this case to emphasize that femoral neuropathy can result as a complication of femoral vessel catheterization. As in our case, use of prolonged digital pressure for
                    post-procedural hemostasis is implicated as one of the causes. Such complication can be reduced by minimising the duration of the procedure, avoiding trauma to the vessels and by
                    proper positioning of the lower extremity by avoiding undue abduction and external rotation of hip. This becomes more relevant in the new millennium, when cardiac diagnostic and
                    interventional procedures are becoming more and more popular.</p>
            </div>
        </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="references">
            <head>References</head>
            <listBibl>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB1" n="[1]">
                  <analytic>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">M.J.</forename>
                                    <surname>Jacobs</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">I.D.</forename>
                                    <surname>Gregoric</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">G.J.</forename>
                                    <surname>Reul</surname>
                                </author>
                            <title level="a" type="main">
                                <title type="main">Profunda femoral artery pseudoaneurysm after percutaneous transluminal procedures manifested by neuropathy</title>
                            </title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title type="main">J. Cardiovasc. Surg.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">6</biblScope>
                        <date when="1992">1992</date>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="729">729</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="731">731</biblScope>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB2" n="[2]">
                  <analytic>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">A.W.</forename>
                                    <surname>Simon</surname>
                                </author>
                            <title level="a" type="main">
                                <title type="main">Use of a mechanical pressure device for hemostasis following cardiac catheterization</title>
                            </title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title type="main">Am. J. Crit. Care</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">1</biblScope>
                        <date when="1994">1994</date>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="62">62</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="64">64</biblScope>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB3" n="[3]">
                  <analytic>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">S.</forename>
                                    <surname>Pradhan</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">A.</forename>
                                    <surname>Gupta</surname>
                                </author>
                            <title level="a" type="main">
                                <title type="main">Iatrogenic median and femoral neuropathy</title>
                            </title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title type="main">J. Assoc. Phys. India</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">43</biblScope>
                        <date when="1995">1995</date>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="141">141</biblScope>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB4" n="[4]">
                  <analytic>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">B.S.</forename>
                                    <surname>Warfel</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">S.G.</forename>
                                    <surname>Marini</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">E.A.</forename>
                                    <surname>Lachmann</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">W.</forename>
                                    <surname>Nagler</surname>
                                </author>
                            <title level="a" type="main">
                                <title type="main">Delayed femoral nerve palsy following femoral vessel catheterization</title>
                            </title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title type="main">Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">74</biblScope>
                        <date when="1993">1993</date>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1211">1211</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1215">1215</biblScope>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
                <biblStruct xml:id="BIB5" n="[5]">
                  <analytic>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">K.C.</forename>
                                    <surname>Kent</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">M.</forename>
                                    <surname>Moscucci</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">S.G.</forename>
                                    <surname>Gallagher</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">S.T.</forename>
                                    <surname>Di Mattia</surname>
                                </author>
                                <author>
                                    <forename type="first">J.J.</forename>
                                    <surname>Skillman</surname>
                                </author>
                            <title level="a" type="main">
                                <title type="main">Neuropathy after cardiac catheterization: incidence, clinical patterns and long term outcome</title>
                            </title>
                  </analytic>
                  <monogr>
                     <title type="main">J. Vasc. Surg.</title>
                     <imprint>
                        <biblScope unit="vol">19</biblScope>
                        <date when="1994">1994</date>
                        <biblScope unit="page" from="1008">1008</biblScope>
                        <biblScope unit="page" to="1013">1013</biblScope>
                     </imprint>
                  </monogr>
               </biblStruct>
            </listBibl>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
